3-1

Introduction

22003
This chapter discusses glider-related aerodynamics. A pilot who understands how forces affect a glider can operate safely 
while maximizing performance. To obtain a more detailed description of general aerodynamics, see the Pilot's Handbook 
of Aeronautical Knowledge (FAA-H-8083-25).

22062
A glider maneuvers around three axes of rotation: vertical, lateral, and longitudinal. Each axis is perpendicular to the other 
two, and all three axes intersect at one central point called the center of gravity (CG), which varies with the loading of 
the glider. Any object on the ground will balance in any orientation if supported from the CG or a point directly above or 
below the CG.

22063
Yaw describes movement around the vertical axis, represented by an imaginary straight line drawn through the CG. 
[Figure 3-1] In flight, moving the rudder left or right causes the glider to yaw. The lateral axis runs parallel to a line from 
wingtip to wingtip. Pulling the stick back or pushing it forward changes the pitch of the glider and controls its movement 
around the lateral axis. Roll describes movement around the longitudinal axis caused by displacing the ailerons in opposite 
directions. This axis runs parallel to a line drawn from the nose to the tail.

22064

Vertical axis

Longitudinal axis

Lateral axis

YA

W

  

PIT

CH

  

RO

LL

  

CG

Figure 3-1. Three axes of rotation with each perpendicular to the other two and all intersecting at the CG.

Forces of Flight

22004
Three forces act on an unpowered glider while in flight—lift, drag, and weight. Thrust is another force of flight that enables 
self-launching gliders to launch on their own and stay aloft when soaring conditions subside.

Chapter 3:  Aerodynamics of Flight


3-2

22006

Flight Path

Lift

Drag

Weight

Flight Path

Weight

Thrust
Drag

Lift

Figure 3-2. Vector components of lift, thrust, drag, and weight (gravity).

Lift

51172
Newton’s laws and Bernoulli’s principle explain lift from different perspectives. Newton’s third law describes the overall 
interaction between atmosphere and wing, while Bernoulli’s principle looks at the effect of air changing speed as it moves 
past the wing. Together, these models provide a valid explanation of lift.

Newton’s Third Law

22007
According to Newton’s Third Law of Motion, for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. As air deflects 
downward because of interaction with the wing, the wing experiences an upward (lifting) reaction.

Bernoulli’s Principle

22008
Bernoulli’s Principle states that as the velocity of a moving fluid (liquid or gas) increases, the pressure within the fluid 
decreases. This principle explains what happens when air moves faster to pass over the top of a wing positioned at an angle 
to the relative wind, i.e., the wind resulting from the forward motion of the glider. The increase in speed of the air as it 
travels over the top of the wing produces a drop in pressure against the wing, and the higher air pressure below the wing 
results in a net lifting force.

Lift Formula

22010
A mathematical relationship exists between lift, the coefficient of lift, airspeed, air density, and the size of the wing. 
Figure 3-3 shows the relationship.

22011

 L = Lift
 CL = Coefficient of lift
   (This dimensionless number is the ratio of lift 
   pressure to dynamic pressure and area. It is 
   specific to a particular airfoil shape, and, below 
   the stall, it is proportional to angle of attack.)
 V = Velocity (feet per second)
 ρ = Air density (slugs per cubic foot)
 S = Wing surface area (square feet)

L = CL V2 2 S

ρ

Figure 3-3. Lift Equation.


3-3

22012
The lift equation shows that total lift changes as the factors on the right side of the equation change. For example, lift varies 
directly with the coefficient of lift. A pilot should understand the concept of angle of attack (AOA) to understand how the 
coefficient of lift varies. The angle of attack is the acute angle between the chord line of the wing and the relative wind 
developed by the motion of the glider through the air. [Figure 3-4] The coefficient of lift increases linearly until reaching 
a critical angle, at which point lift decreases even though the angle of attack increases. Once reaching the critical angle, 
any further increase in the angle of attack disturbs the smooth airflow over the top of the wing and causes a decrease in lift 
or a stall. Lift also varies with the square of velocity or airspeed. Doubling airspeed quadruples the amount of lift. As air 
density decreases with increasing altitude or rising temperature, lift decreases.

56079

Flight path

Relative wind

Flight path

Relative wind

Flight path

Relative wind

3° Angle of Attack
6° Angle of Attack
12° Angle of Attack

Figure 3-4. Angle of attack.

29173
When describing lift as a vector, the total lift acts through a point known as the center of lift (CL). This point occurs aft of 
the center of gravity. Therefore, lift creates a pitching moment on the glider, which the tail must counteract. The total lift 
vector acts perpendicular to the flightpath through the CL and perpendicular to the lateral axis.

Drag

22013
The force that resists the movement of the glider consists of parasite and induced drag, which combine to form total drag.

Parasite Drag

22014
Parasite drag includes the resistance of the air to any object moving through it created by skin friction, the shape of the 
object, and interference patterns within the airflow around the object. While glider wing designs generate minimal induced 
and parasite drag, other parts of the glider may create significant parasite drag. Parasite drag increases with the square of 
speed. Simply put, if the speed of the glider doubles, parasite drag increases four times. [Figure 3-5]

22015

Drag 

Speed 

    

    

     

     

Para

site 

drag

Figure 3-5. Parasite drag versus speed.

Induced Drag

22035
As the angle of attack increases, more air flows around the wingtip from the lower to the upper surface, which creates 
larger wingtip vortices. [Figure 3-6]. Panel 4 of Figure 3-6, depicts the wing moving horizontally in level flight. The 


3-4

vertical lift vector develops perpendicular to the flight path and oncoming relative wind. Since wingtip vortices cause 
a downward divergence of the average relative wind from the flightpath, the total lift vector, which is perpendicular to 
the average relative wind, tilts back. This backward tilt of the total lift vector creates induced drag as a byproduct of lift. 
Factors that increase the angle between the total lift and vertical lift vectors, such as low airspeed and high angle of attack, 
increase induced drag.

22036

Induced Drag

Flight Path Relative Wind

Vertical lift

Total lift

Average relative wind

2
Wingtip vortices develop.

4
The average relative wind is inclined downward 
and rearward, and lift is inclined aft. The rearward 
component of lift is induced drag.

3
The downwash increases behind the wing.

1
High pressure air joins low pressure air at the
trailing edge of the wing and wingtips.

Low
pressure

Low
pressure

High pressure

High pressure

Atmospheric pressure

Atmospheric pressure

Figure 3-6. Induced drag from the production of lift.

51220
As a glider flies faster, the wings can generate the same amount of lift with a reduced angle of attack. Increased speed with 
a smaller angle of attack reduces the backward slant of the total lift vector and reduces induced drag.

Total Drag

22037
The total drag curve represents the combination of parasite and induced drag and varies with airspeed. [Figure 3-7]

22038

Drag

Speed

 

 

 

 

 I

n

d

u

c

ed

 d

ra

g

Par

asit

e dr

ag

Total drag

Stall Speed

(L/DMAX)

Minimum
Drag

Figure 3-7. Parasite drag, induced drag, and total drag versus airspeed.


3-5

Ground Effect

22122
Operating within one wingspan above the ground modifies the three-dimensional airflow pattern around the glider. This 
ground effect decreases downwash, reduces the size and effect of wingtip vortices, reduces induced drag, and results in 
more efficient flight. This effect allows the glider to fly at a lower airspeed during takeoff and reduces the sink rate of a 
glider on landing.

Weight

22060
Weight results from the force of gravity acting on the mass of the glider. The vertical components of both lift and drag act 
in opposition to the weight vector, which acts vertically downward through the center of gravity.

Thrust

22061
Unpowered gliders use an outside source, such as a tow plane, winch, or vehicle, to launch. Once released, these gliders 
maintain forward motion from conversion of potential energy to kinetic energy. A glider descends through the surrounding 
air to make this conversion. Powered gliders have engines, which can provide thrust for launch or to sustain flight.

Unpowered Glide Vector Analysis

57047
What propels an unpowered glider in a continuous descent in the surrounding airmass? A vector diagram with the flight 
path as one axis and a second axis perpendicular to the flight path depicts how the forces of weight, lift, and drag balance 
each other during an unpowered straight-line descent. [Figure 3-8] Weight (W) always points to the ground (center of the 
Earth). Lift (L) develops perpendicular to the flight path. Drag always acts backward along the flight path. While weight 
does not align with either axis on the diagram, the weight vector can resolve into two perpendicular components, one 
forward along the flight path opposing drag (Wf) and the other perpendicular to the flight path opposing lift (Wp). As 
shown in the figure, Wp balances lift, while Wf balances drag during an unaccelerated descent. Thus, gravity is the external 
engine that pulls the glider forward by acting on Wf.

56067

Horizontal

Flight Path

Chordline

D

L

Wf

Wp

W

γ
α

γ

L =  Lift
D =  Drag
W =  Weight
Wp =  perpendicular component of weight
Wf =  forward component of weight
  γ =  flight path angle (or angle of descent)
  α =  angle of attack

Balance of forces acting perpendicular to the flight path:

L - Wp = 0      or     L = Wp

Where Wp = W cos γ

Balance of forces acting along the flight path:

Wf - D  = 0      or     Wf = D

Where Wf = W sin γ

Figure 3-8. The forces along an unpowered glider’s flight path and its perpendicular.

58708
An unpowered descent converts the glider’s potential energy of height above the ground into kinetic energy of motion on 
a continuous basis. The flight path angle or angle of descent (ɣ) is the same as the angle between Wp and W. Wf, Wp, and 
W could form three sides of a right triangle. Trigonometry gives the Wf and Wp components of weight using the formulas 
shown within the balance of forces boxes in Figure 3-8. A steeper flight path angle (ɣ) increases the forward component of 
weight (Wf) and decreases the perpendicular component of weight (Wp).


3-6

Glide Ratio & Wing Design

22039
One specific point appears in Figure 3-7 above. The point displayed, (L/DMAX), corresponds to a speed where the total lift 
capacity of the glider, when compared to the total drag reaches a maximum value. In calm air, this speed yields maximum 
glide distance and the published glide ratio for a glider. The glide ratio gives the distance the glider can travel during a 
given descent in altitude. For example, a glide ratio of 50:1 means a glider could travel 50 feet forward while losing one 
foot of altitude.

Wing Planform

22040
The shape (planform) of the wings affects the amount of lift and drag produced. The four most common wing planforms 
used on gliders are elliptical, rectangular, tapered, and swept forward. [Figure 3-9]

22041

Elliptical Wing
Tapered Wing

Swept-Forward Wing

Rectangular Wing

Figure 3-9. Planforms of glider wings

Aspect Ratio

22058
Dividing the wingspan (from wingtip to wingtip) by the average wing chord determines the aspect ratio for a glider. Glider 
wings have a high aspect ratio, as shown in Figure 3-10, which generates significant lift at low angles of attack with 
minimal induced drag.


3-7

22059

51' wing span

Wing area = 219 ft 2
Maximum gross weight = 1,040 lb

Aspect ratio = 11.85:1

Glide ratio = 22:1

Wing area = 193 ft 2
Maximum gross weight = 1,808 lb

Aspect ratio = 39:1

Glide ratio = 60:1

86.9 '  wing span

Chord lines 4.3 feet
Chord lines 4.3 feet

Chord lines 2.22 feet
Chord lines 2.22 feet

Aspect ratio is determined by dividing the wingspan (from wingtip to wingtip), by the average chord. 

Figure 3-10. Aspect ratio

Winglets

51221
Wingtip devices, or winglets, also improve efficiency of the glider by altering the airflow near the wingtips and reducing 
induced drag.

Washout

22046
The wing root refers to the portion of the wing nearest the fuselage. Washout refers to a slight wing twist between the 
wing root and wingtip, which causes the wing root to have a greater angle of attack (AOA) than the wing tip. If the AOA 
becomes excessive, airflow will separate at the wing root before separation occurs at the wing tip. This wing design 
provides warning of any impending stall or overall separation of air from the wing and allows for continued aileron control 
at the onset of a stall.

Stability

22065
Vertical gusts, a sudden shift in CG, or deflection of the controls by the pilot can displace the glider from its orientation 
in flight. Static and dynamic stability define how the glider reacts after a displacement. Static stability describes the initial 
direction of the response. A glider with positive static stability initially moves back toward its original orientation after 
a change. A glider with negative static stability would increase displacement after a change. A glider with neutral static 
stability tends to hold any new orientation. The level of stability about each axis of a glider results from its design and 
loading.


3-8

22067
A glider with positive static stability will swing past its original pitch attitude and undergo a series of oscillations. If that 
glider has positive dynamic stability, the size of any oscillations will dampen out over time. The same glider with negative 
dynamic stability would experience oscillations that increase in amplitude over time. That glider with neutral dynamic 
stability would experience a series of constant oscillations over time. [Figure 3-11]

22068

Neutral dynamic stability

Positive dynamic stability

Negative dynamic stability

Figure 3-11. Three types of dynamic stability.

22069
Gliders have a CG in front of the center of lift—the single point through which the sum of all lift acts. This design requires 
an opposing tail-down force to maintain control and to create positive static stability for pitch. [Figure 3- 12] For example, 
if a pilot displaces a glider’s nose upward and releases the controls, the glider will lose airspeed. The resulting reduction 
in down force provided by the tail causes the glider’s nose to drop back toward its original position. This design results in 
positive initial longitudinal stability (stability around the lateral axis). When a positive dynamically stable glider oscillates 
in pitch, the amplitude of the oscillations diminishes through each cycle and eventually stops at the speed where downward 
force on the tail offsets the tendency to nose down.

22070

Center of gravity

Center of lift

Negative AOA

(Exaggerated in
 this illustration)

Figure 3-12. The horizontal stabilizer offsets the natural tendency of a glider to pitch down.

22072
The glider POH lists an acceptable range for the CG, and the pilot normally computes the CG location before flight to 
verify the glider will fly as designed. A glider with an aft CG requires less tail-down force, which makes pitch oscillations 


3-9

more difficult to dampen. As airspeed decreases in a glider loaded aft of the permissible CG limit, the nose of the glider 
might rise uncontrollably and lead to an unrecoverable stall or spin. A forward CG increases induced drag and reduces 
performance. A glider with a CG ahead of the published forward limit may not provide enough pitch control to raise the 
nose during a landing. Chapter 5, Glider Performance, contains further discussion of proper loading of a glider and the 
importance of CG.

Lateral Stability

22074
Lateral stability describes the glider’s tendency to return to wings-level flight following a displacement. [Figure 3-13] 
For example, due to a gust of wind, the glider may start to roll. The angle of attack increases slightly on one wing as it 
moves down, which causes the lift to increase on that wing. On the rising wing, the opposite effect decreases lift. This lift 
differential tends to dampen the rolling motion but does not bring the glider back to wings-level.

22075

D

i

r

e

c

t

i

o

n

 

o

f 

r

o

t

a

t

i

o

n

Angle of attack reduced, lift reduced

Angle of attack increased, lift increased

Figure 3-13. Lateral stability.


3-10

22076
Wing dihedral, the upward angle of the wings from horizontal, adds to lateral stability. As the glider rolls, the descending 
wing has a larger vertical lift component than the rising wing. This difference in the vertical lift component between each 
wing tends to roll the glider back toward level flight. [Figure 3-14]

22077

Dihedral angle
Dihedral angle

Figure 3-14. Dihedral angle.

Flutter

22073
Due to the flexibility of a glider wing design, the wing may oscillate rapidly or flutter at high airspeeds. Additionally, 
looseness in the control surfaces can also result in flutter of flight control surfaces near maximum speed. Improper balance 
of the control surfaces may also cause flutter. Since prolonged flutter may cause structural failure, the pilot should reduce 
the airspeed sufficiently to stop any flutter.

Pilot Induced Oscillation (PIO)

34200
Pilot-induced oscillations (PIOs) can occur when the pilot applies excess control pressure that causes an overshoot of the 
desired flight attitude. If the pilot repeatedly moves the controls back and forth using excess pressure, the glider oscillates 
continuously past the desired attitude. The oscillations can increase in amplitude and may cause loss of control. While PIOs 
most likely occur as pitch oscillations, roll and yaw induced PIOs may also occur.

34201
Although PIOs can occur at any time, they often arise during primary training. Experienced pilots may also induce PIOs 
when flying an unfamiliar make and model glider. For that reason and before flying an unfamiliar glider, all pilots should 
review and understand the flight characteristics of that glider.

34202
If encountering PIOs, the pilot should remember that changes in flight attitude take time. The pilot should begin to ease 
flight control pressure as the glider begins to respond in the desired direction. As the glider nears the desired attitude, the 
pilot centers the appropriate flight control so that overshooting does not occur.

34203
During the first moments of the takeoff roll, as airflow begins to impact the control surfaces, it takes considerable 
displacement of the flight controls to affect the glider’s flightpath. The pilot also experiences a higher control lag time 
due to reduced control effectiveness at low speed. As the glider accelerates, aerodynamic response improves, lag time 
decreases, and PIOs become less likely.

Turning Flight

22078
Any moving object continues in a straight line until a force causes a change in direction. A pilot creates turning force by 
using the ailerons to roll the glider so that the direction of the total lift vector inclines. When a glider rolls away from 
wings-level, lift divides into two components. The vertical component opposes weight, while the other acts horizontally to 
oppose centrifugal force. [Figure 3-15]


3-11

22079

Vertical component
of lift (effective lift)

Weight

Resultant force

Centrifugal force

Lift

Figure 3-15. Forces in a banked turn.

22080
When using the horizontal component of lift to turn the glider, a reduction in the vertical component of lift will occur unless 
the pilot increases back pressure on the control stick, increasing the angle of attack and total lift produced by the wings. 
Increasing total lift can restore the vertical component of lift to that required to counteract weight. Otherwise, the descent 
rate in the airmass increases.

Load Factor

22082
Any force applied to a glider to deflect its flight from a straight line produces a stress on its structure; load factor describes 
this force. The load factor is the ratio of the total air load acting on the glider to the weight of the glider.  Load factor may be 
positive or negative and depends on the current flightpath. Load factor units often use “G,” a gravitational force equivalent. 
A load factor of one, or 1 G, represents conditions in which the lift is equal to the weight. A glider in flight with a load 
factor of one does not necessarily mean the glider is in straight-and-level flight, but rather that the total lift equals that of 
unaccelerated straight-and-level flight.

22085
When subjecting a glider to added Gs in a pull up from a dive, anyone in the glider feels a sensation of pressing into the 
seat with a force equal to the number of Gs times the person’s weight. In addition, the person's extremities require added 
muscular force to resist the downward force. Added Gs can affect blood flow to the brain, affect cognitive ability, and cause 
disorientation.

22086
Load factor increases rapidly as the angle of bank increases during a turn when the pilot increases lift to prevent a change 
in vertical speed. From an aerodynamic perspective, load factors concern the pilot for two distinct reasons:

22088

1. Below a certain airspeed, a stall occurs before the pilot can create a dangerous overload on the glider structure.

22087

2. Above a certain airspeed, known as the maneuvering speed or V*A, a pilot can generate enough lift to create a 

dangerous overload on the glider structure.

22090
In a turn at constant speed, the pilot pulls back on the stick to furnish the extra lift necessary to maintain a constant vertical 
speed in the airmass. The load and stall speed increase significantly as bank angles exceed 30 degrees. [Figure 3-16] and 
[Figure 3-17]


3-12

22091

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Load factor (Gs)

Angle of bank (degrees)

0°
10° 20°
30°
40°
50°
60°
70°
80°
90° 100°

Figure 3-16. The loads placed on a glider while maintaining a constant rate of descent with respect to the surrounding air increase as 

the angle of bank increases.

22089

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Percentage increase in stall speed

Angle of bank (degrees)

0°
10° 20°
30°
40°
50°
60°
70°
80°
90° 100°

Figure 3-17. A 60° angle of bank causes a 41 percent increase in the glider’s stall speed.

Rate of Turn

22092
Rate of turn refers to the amount of time it takes for a glider to turn a specified number of degrees. If flown at the same 
airspeed and angle of bank, every glider turns at the same rate. If airspeed increases while the angle of bank remains the 
same, the rate of turn decreases. Conversely, a constant airspeed coupled with an increased angle of bank results in an 
increased rate of turn.

Radius of Turn

22093
The horizontal distance an aircraft uses to complete a turn depends upon the radius of turn. The radius of turn at any given 
bank angle varies directly with the square of the airspeed. Therefore, if the airspeed of the glider were doubled, the radius 
of the turn would be four times greater. The radius of turn also depends on a glider’s angle of bank. If the angle of bank 
increases and the airspeed remains the same, the radius of turn decreases.[Figure 3-18] When flying in thermals, a smaller 
turn radius enables a glider to fly closer to the fastest rising core of the thermal and gain altitude more quickly.


3-13

22094

30°
45°
60°

TAS 40 MPH

TAS 60 MPH

TAS 80 MPH

feet
Turn radius
0 7
1

feet
Turn radius
4 0
2

feet
Turn radius
2 8
4

feet
Turn radius
8 5
1

feet
Turn radius
1 7
4

feet
Turn radius
4 0
7

feet
Turn radius
6 2
0

feet
Turn radius
3 9
1

feet
Turn radius
4 7
2

Level stall airspeed at gross weight is 38 knots

Figure 3-18. A glider’s radius of turn as compared to angle of bank.

Turn Coordination

22096
When rolling into a turn, the lowered aileron on the outside wing produces more lift for that wing. Since induced drag is 
a byproduct of lift, the outside wing also experiences more drag than the inside wing. This causes adverse yaw, a yawing 
tendency toward the outside of the turn. Appropriate use of rudder corrects for any adverse yaw caused by aileron drag. 
Because glider wings provide a long lever arm for adverse yaw, the pilot may need to use substantial rudder pressure 
during a coordinated turn. The amount of adverse yaw may surprise a pilot transitioning from an airplane, and the amount 
of adverse yaw will be much greater than experienced in a typical airplane.

Slips

22098
While uncoordinated flight decreases performance, pilots can use different slipping techniques to steepen the descent angle 
or to counteract a crosswind during landing.

22105
Because of the location of the pitot tube and static vents, airspeed indicators in some gliders may have considerable error 
when the pilot places the glider in a slip. The pilot should recognize this error and know how to perform slips based on 
secondary indications such as the attitude of the glider, the sound of the airflow, and the feel of the flight controls.

22095
A pilot normally coordinates rudder and aileron inputs during a turn. Using too little rudder, or if rudder is applied too late, 
results in a slip. Too much rudder, or rudder applied before aileron, results in a skid. Both skids and slips expose a side of 
the fuselage to the relative wind, creating additional parasite drag.

Forward Slip

22106
During a forward slip the glider’s horizontal path over the ground remains unchanged. [Figure 3-19] This slip uses 
uncoordinated flight to dissipate energy which increases rate of descent without increasing the glider’s forward speed. 
Pilots sometimes use forward slips during a landing approach over obstacles or for short-field landings when necessary to 
dissipate altitude no longer needed for a margin of safety during the approach.


3-14

22107

Forward Slip
Slideslip

Figure 3-19. A comparison of a forward slip to a sideslip.

22108
To enter a slip from straight flight, the pilot lowers the wing on the side toward which the slip occurs using the ailerons. 
Simultaneously, the pilot yaws the aircraft's nose in the opposite direction by applying enough opposite rudder so that the 
glider’s longitudinal axis no longer aligns with its flightpath. The pilot should yaw the glider such that it maintains the 
original ground track and raises the nose sufficiently to prevent the airspeed from increasing. In crosswinds, initiating a 
slip by lowering the wing on windward side of the glider provides more stable path control. The pilot discontinues a slip by 
leveling the wings and by smoothly and simultaneously releasing the rudder pressure, while readjusting the pitch attitude 
for a normal glide.

22109
Note: Forward slips with wing flaps extended should not occur if the manufacturer’s operating instructions prohibit such 
operation.

Sideslip

22110
During crosswind landings, a sideslip can counteract wind drift and allows the glider to touch down with its longitudinal 
axis parallel to the direction of motion. The pilot uses rudder pressure to keep the glider’s longitudinal axis parallel to the 
desired ground track, but the path over the ground can change depending on the amount of bank. To perform a sideslip, 
the pilot lowers the upwind wing and simultaneously applies sufficient opposite rudder to maintain the nose alignment.

Stalls

22112
A stall occurs whenever the angle between the chord line and relative wind exceeds the critical AOA. [Figure 3-20] A stall 
results in a reduction in lift, although the wings still support some of the aircraft's weight during a stall. Stalls may occur 
at any airspeed and in any flight attitude.

22113

Separation starts
Separation moves forward
Airfoil stalls

Figure 3-20. A stall occurs when the angle of attack exceeds the critical angle of attack.


3-15

32410
Many factors affect the stall speed of a glider, including weight, load factor due to maneuvering, wing contamination, and 
CG location. As the weight or the load factor of the glider increases, flight at any given airspeed relies on an increased 
AOA—closer to the critical angle of attack. A higher load factor or glider weight causes the glider to reach the critical angle 
at a higher speed. The distribution of weight also affects stall speed. For example, a forward CG requires more tail-down 
force to balance the aircraft. This requires the wings to produce more lift than with the CG further aft. Therefore, a more 
forward CG also increases stall speed.

22114
Environmental factors also affect stall speed. Snow, ice, or frost accumulation on wing surfaces can increase the weight 
of the wing and disrupt airflow, both of which increase stall speed. Turbulence has an impact on the stall speed of a glider 
because the vertical gusts change the direction of the relative wind and abruptly increase the AOA. During landing in gusty 
conditions, pilots normally increase the approach airspeed by half of the difference between the steady wind and gust value 
to maintain a safe margin above stall. For example, if the winds were 10 knots gusting to 16 knots, it would be prudent to 
add 3 knots ((16 – 10) ÷ 2 = 3) to the approach speed.

Spins

22115
A spin develops from an aggravated stall that results in the glider descending in a helical or corkscrew path. A spin may 
develop as a complex, uncoordinated flight maneuver in which one wing becomes more stalled than the other. Upon 
entering a spin, the more completely stalled wing usually drops before the other, and the nose of the aircraft yaws in the 
direction of the low wing. In this spin scenario, the ascending wing experiences more lift and less drag. [Figure 3-21] The 
opposite wing moves down and back due to less lift and increased drag.

22116

Increasing CL and CD

Coefficient of lift (CL)

Coeffi

cient

 of d

rag 

(CD

)

Descending wing

Stall

Ascending wing

Increasing AOA

Figure 3-21. The relative coefficients of lift and drag for each wing during a spin, which generate differential lift and drag and induces 

roll and yaw.

22117
Spins may occur after a glider stalls in uncoordinated flight with unequal airflow over the wings. Any resultant spin usually 
occurs in the direction of rudder application. The entry, wing form, and CG usually determine the type of spin that results 
from an uncoordinated wing stall. Glider pilots should understand the stall characteristics for any glider flown, and spin 
recovery techniques as described in either the GFM, if applicable, or in Chapter 8, Abnormal and Emergency Procedures.

22118
Spin classification includes three categories, as shown in Figure 3-22. The entry, wing form, and CG usually determine 
the type of spin that results from an uncoordinated wing stall. The most common type of spin is the upright or erect spin, 
which maintains a slightly nose-down rolling and yawing motion in the same direction. A second type of spin, an inverted 
spin, involves the aircraft spinning upside down with the yaw and roll occurring in opposite directions. In a third type of 
spin, the flat spin, the glider yaws around the vertical axis at a pitch attitude nearly level with the horizon. A flat spin often 
has a very high rate of rotation with a difficult or impossible recovery. A properly loaded glider should not enter a flat spin. 
Flat spins can also be inverted.


3-16

22119

Erect spin
Inverted spin
Flat spin

Figure 3-22. Three types of spins.

22120
A stall and spin entry near the ground may prove fatal because a pilot may not have adequate altitude to recover. Therefore, 
pilots should avoid errors that could lead to a stall/spin accident. For example, during the approach and landing phase 
with a tailwind on the base leg, a pilot might try to tighten the turn to final using rudder, or to make a steep turn to prevent 
overshooting the final approach course. A skidding turn could lead to the lower wing exceeding its critical AOA before the 
upper wing and could result in a spin. An excessively steep turn could also result in an accelerated stall and spin.

Chapter Summary

41705
This chapter focuses on the four forces of flight, which include lift, drag, thrust, and weight. Components of one force 
can contribute to another. When lift offsets gravity and thrust offsets drag, unaccelerated flight occurs. The chapter also 
introduces the concept of ground effect, which results from a reduction in induced drag near the ground. A glider has 3 axes 
of rotation and moves about each axis because of natural disturbances and pilot input. Roll occurs around the longitudinal 
axis, pitch around the lateral axis, and yaw around the vertical axis. Stability refers to the ability of the aircraft to return to 
its original path and orientation after an upset. Pilots unfamiliar with the effects of control inputs and stability can induce 
oscillations. This chapter covers turning flight and the effect of forces on rate of turn, radius of turn, turn coordination, and 
load factors. The chapter also discusses stalls and spins.


