6-1

Introduction

32816
Safe operation of a glider depends on careful assembly and preflight. Proper assembly techniques, followed by a close 
inspection of the glider using checklists contained in the Glider Flight Manual/Pilot’s Operating Handbook (GFM/POH), 
provide for that safety. Pilots should conduct launch procedures systematically and consistently for each flight using 
appropriate methods and teamwork. Students and pilots unfamiliar with glider assembly should seek instruction from a 
glider flight instructor.

Assembly & Storage

32822
Personnel preparing to assemble a glider should consider the following elements: location, number of helpers, tools, parts, 
and checklists that detail the appropriate assembly procedures. The GFM/POH should contain checklists for assembling 
and preflighting a glider. If not, personnel should develop one and follow it. Glider pilots should avoid distractions that 
may occur during assembly and check for required documents on board the glider.

32817
During assembly of the glider, pilots normally check for documents carried on board, which include:

32818

1. Airworthiness certificate displayed in the aircraft

32819

2. Registration

32820

3. Required placards

32821

4. GFM/POH

32826
Proper tools and accessories support glider assembly. [Figure 6-1] Some individuals place all the necessary hardware on 
a shelf or canvas with a spot for each item. An inventory of the hardware after assembly reduces the risk of a misplaced 
tool in the glider structure that could restrict or jam a flight control. Since detached tape could also cause control issues in 
flight, any person applying tape should use care when taping the wing roots, turtle deck (cover where the flight controls 
are attached), elevator, or other areas.

32827

Figure 6-1. Wing stands and wing dollies may assist assembling the glider.

Chapter 6:  Preflight & Ground Operations


6-2

32828
Depending on the type of glider, assembly may involve two or more people. After assembly, a thorough inspection of all 
attach points ensures proper installation and security of bolts and pins.

32829
On many gliders, the wings routinely detach from the fuselage for storage. On some motor gliders, the wings fold. After 
folding or detaching the wings, persons can move the glider in and around the hangar area. [Figure 6-2] This allows 
assembly, disassembly, and storage in a normal size hangar. Hangars usually range between 35 and 45 feet in width. 
Because most glider wings span a minimum of 40 feet (12 meters) total length, a large hangar may save time and effort.

32830

Figure 6-2. Folding the wings of the glider reduces storage space.

32832
Once a glider has been completely assembled and before flight, the pilot inspects all critical areas to ensure completion of 
all flight control attachments. Many manufacturers provide a critical assembly checklist (CAC) for use after assembly. A 
positive control check (PCC) provides an additional means of verification that should occur even if appropriate personnel 
complete a CAC. The pilot should refer to a written checklist provided by the manufacturer or a commercial source that 
accurately reproduces glider checklists.

Trailering

32835
Glider transport, storage, or retrieval uses specially designed trailers [Figure 6-3], and the glider components should fit 
snugly in the space provided, without being forced, and in a manner that prevents chafing. Glider trailers may also have 
storage areas to secure parts.

32836

Figure 6-3. Components of a glider stored and transported in a trailer.

32846
When towing a trailer, standard motor vehicle towing precautions and experience apply.

Tiedown & Securing

32847
When tying down at airports shared by powered aircraft, propeller blast may cause damage to an improperly secured glider. 
Personnel should tie down a glider with the canopy closed and latched before leaving it unattended. If possible, the tie-


6-3

down spot should face into the wind. Permanent tie-downs often use straps, ropes, or chains for the wings and tail and do 
not adjust for variations in wind. Pilots should carry a proper tie down kit for a cross-country trip if no permanent tie-down 
exists at the destination. Pilots should consult the GFH/POH for specific tie-down procedures.

32848
If expecting strong winds, pilots can tie the spoilers open with seat belts, or place a padded stand under the tail to reduce 
the angle of attack of the wings. When securing the glider for an extended period, gust locks on the control surfaces 
prevent them from banging against their stops. Pitot tube and total energy probe covers prevent entry of insects or debris. 
[Figure 6-4]

32849

Figure 6-4. Protecting the pitot tube and total energy probe.

32850
Glider canopy covers provide additional protection from damage while shielding the interior of the flight deck from 
ultraviolet (UV) rays. [Figure 6-5]

32851

Figure 6-5. Protecting the canopy.

Water Ballast

32852
If transporting a glider or parking a glider in cold weather, personnel should check for and drain any remaining water 
ballast. If unable to drain water ballast, adding antifreeze prevents freezing.

Ground Handling

32853
Moving a glider on the ground requires special handling procedures, especially during high winds. When moving a glider, 
all personnel should receive a briefing on procedures and signals.

32854
When using a vehicle to move a glider, personnel should use a tow line more than half the wingspan of the glider. If one 
wingtip stops moving for any reason, this tow line length prevents the glider from pivoting and striking the tow vehicle 


6-4

with the opposite wingtip. Since any wind or air currents from another aircraft can cause the glider canopy to close 
abruptly, a closed and latched canopy can prevent damage to the canopy frame or glass.

32855
When starting to move the tow vehicle, the driver should slowly take up slack in the line to prevent jerking the glider. The 
towing speed should not exceed that of a brisk walk. The driver should use at least one wing walker. The wing walker(s) 
and the driver of the tow vehicle function as a team, alert for obstacles, wind, and any other factor that may affect the safety 
of the glider. The driver should stay alert for any signals from the wing walker(s). [Figure 6-6]

32856

Figure 6-6. Positioning the glider for the tow vehicle.

32857
Strong winds and gusts can damage the glider during ground handling. During ground movement in high winds, two or 
more crewmembers normally hold the wingtips and a pilot sits at the controls to deploy spoilers and hold the controls 
appropriately.

32858
Another method of towing uses specially designed towing gear like a trailer tow bar that attaches directly to the vehicle 
towing a trailer. The tow bar and other equipment make guiding the glider much easier and allow the wing walkers to focus 
on wingtip clearances. [Figure 6-7]

32859

Figure 6-7. A wing dolly (left) ready for attachment and a tail dolly (right) being used for glider ground movement.

Launch Equipment Inspection

32860
While a glider pilot may inspect the tow rope, 14 CFR part 91, section 91.309(a) gives the person operating a civil aircraft 
towing a glider responsibility for the tow rope strength. [Figure 6-8] Since a weak spot could develop at any time, tow 
ropes should undergo inspection prior to every flight. The tow line should be free from excess wear; all strands should be 
intact, and the line should be free from knots. A knot in the tow line reduces its strength by up to 50 percent and creates 
a thick spot in the tow line more susceptible to wear. The ring to which the glider attaches may create a high-wear area. 
Operators may replace the tow rope periodically due to ultraviolet (UV) exposure from the sun or after a specific number 
of tows.


6-5

32861

Figure 6-8. Inspecting the tow line.

34825
Tow ropes and cables are made of materials such as nylon, step-index fiber from Red Polyester, Hollow Braid POLYPRO, 
Dacron, steel, and Polyethylene. [Figure 6-9]

34826

Step-index fiber from Red Polyester

Hollow Braid PolyPro
Dacron

Polyethylene Braids

Figure 6-9. Tow rope materials.


6-6

46850
Figure 6-10 shows the strength of some ropes typically used. The rope manufacturer can provide exact specifications. 
14 CFR part 91, section 91.309(a)(3), requires tow line strength within a range of 80 to 200 percent of the maximum 
certificated weight of the glider. However, the tow line may have a breaking strength more than twice the maximum 
certificated operating weight of the glider if using  safety links as specified in 14 CFR part 91, section 91.309(a)(3). Note 
that a specific model of glider may have a more stringent limitation on the maximum tow line strength. The POH would 
list this limitation.

32862

Diameter

3/16"
1/4"
5/16"

Polyethylene
Hollow braid
700
1,200
1,750

Polypropylene
Monofilament
800
1,300
1,900

Polypropylene
Multifilament
870
1,200
2,050

Nylon

960
1,500
2,400

Dacron

720
1,150
1,750

Figure 6-10. Typical rope strengths.

32864
If using a tow line with a breaking strength more than twice the maximum certificated operating weight of the glider, 
14 CFR part 91, section 91.309(a)(3) requires installation of two safety/weak links, either of which can break before 
excess tension on the tow line causes structural damage to either the glider or the tow plane. The weak link near the 
glider attachment point [Figure 6-11] requires the same breaking strength range as the tow rope, 80 to 200 percent of the 
maximum certificated operating weight of the glider. The weak link installed near the tow plane attachment point must 
have a breaking strength greater, but not more than 25 percent greater, than that of the weak link at the glider end of the 
tow line and not more than twice the maximum certificated operating weight of the glider. See figure 6-12 for a sample 
weak link strength analysis.

33738

Weak link

Figure 6-11. A safety link. The foam added to the tow line prevents tow line abrasion.


6-7

34824

Greater, but not more than 25 percent greater than 
that of the safety link at the glider end, and not greater 
than twice the glider max gross weight (MGW).

RULE

1000 lbs. x 25% = 250 lbs.
1000 lbs. + 250 lbs. = 1250 lbs.
700 lbs. x 2 = 1400 lbs.

700 lbs. MGW

Glider safety link 
breaking strength 
1,000 lbs.

To meet the rule below, the tow plane safety 
link strength requirement must be greater than 
1,000 lbs. and not more than 1,250 lbs.
The 1,400 lb. strength requirement is
not relevant since 1,250 lbs. is the maximum
allowed by rule.

Figure 6-12. Safety link strength requirements assuming a 1,000 lb. safety link installed near the glider.

32865
The two most common types of tow hook are an over-the-top design, such as a Schweizer hook, or a grasping style, such 
as a Tost hook. Pilots should inspect and verify that any tow hook is free from damage and operates freely. [Figure 6-13 
and Figure 6-14]

32866

Figure 6-13. Schweizer-type tow hook.

32867

Figure 6-14. Tost hook.


6-8

Glider Preflight Inspection

32868
Pilots should conduct a thorough inspection of the glider before launch. If the glider GFM/POH does not contain a preflight 
checklist, the pilot should develop a checklist using the guidelines contained in Figure 6-15.

32869

Begin by assessing the overall condition of the fiberglass 
or fabric.

Be alert for signs of damage or excessive wear.

Ensure that the canopy is clean and free from damage.

Verify the interior wing and control connections are safe and 
secure.

If a battery is used, ensure that it is charged and safely 
fastened in the proper spot.

Ensure that seat harnesses are free from excessive wear.

Buckle and tighten any harness that will not be used to
prevent it from inadvertently interfering with controls. 

Test the tow hook to ensure it is operating correctly.  

Inspect top, bottom, and leading edge of wings, ensuring
they are free from excess dirt, bugs, and damage. 

Inspect spoilers/dive brakes for mechanical damage. They 
should be clear of obstructions. Perform control continuity
check. 

Inspect the wingtip and wingtip skid or wheel for general 
condition. 

Inspect ailerons for freedom of movement, the condition 
of hinges and connections, and the condition of the gap 
seal. Perform control continuity
check. 

Check the condition of flaps for freedom from damage and
for appropriate range of motion. Perform control continuity
check.

Inspect the general condition of the empennage. 

Check static ports, pitot tube, and total energy probe to 
ensure they are free from obstruction. 

Check top, bottom, and leading edge of tailplane for 
bugs, dirt, and damage. 

Check the landing gear for signs of damage or excessive 
wear. The brake pads should be checked if they are visible;
otherwise, the brakes can be checked by pulling the glider 
forward and applying the brakes. Note that the landing gear 
is frequently a problem area for gliders used in training.

Check elevator and trim tab for condition of connections, 
freedom of movement, and condition of gap seal. Perform 
control continuity check.

Check rudder freedom of movement and condition of 
connections. Perform control continuity check.

Figure 6-15. A glider preflight inspection checklist.

Prelaunch Checklist

32870
The pilot should conduct a positive control check with the help of an additional crewmember, especially if the glider was 
just assembled. The pilot moves the control stick and rudder pedals while the crewmember provides resistance, holding 
each aileron, the elevator, spoilers, flaps, and the rudder to ensure correct and secure control connections. [Figure 6-16] 
A stick or pedal that moves freely with the corresponding control surfaces restricted indicates the connections are not 
secure, and the glider is not airworthy. Pilots should adjust the pilot or passenger seats, as well as adjustable controls, such 
as rudder pedals, prior to buckling the seat belt and shoulder harness. Caution should be exercised to avoid crimping or 
clamping any onboard oxygen supply.


6-9

32871

Figure 6-16. Positive control check of spoilers.

32872
If the GFM/POH does not provide a specific prelaunch checklist, then some good generic checklists are CB SWIFT CBE 
and ABBCCCDDE, which are explained in Figure 6-17. Pilots should follow each step carefully regardless of the checklist 
used.

32873

A

B

C

C

C

D

D

B

E

Altimeter set to correct elevation
Ballast
Seat belts and shoulder harnesses fastened and tightened
Controls checked for full and free movement
Canopy closed, locked, and checked 
Cable or towline properly connected to the correct hook
Dive brakes closed and locked
Direction of wind checked
Emergency Plan reviewed

Phase I:
•  Controls (plural)
•  Ballast

Phase II:
•  Straps (plural)
•  Wind
•  Instruments (plural)
•  Flaps (singular)
•  Trim

Phase III:
•  Canopy
•  Brakes (singular for most gliders, plural for a Blanik, since the 
   wheel brake is not at the end of the air brake travel) 
•  Emergency plan (the three phases plus the return speed that   
 can and should be prebriefed prior to closing the canopy)

Before Takeoff Checklist 

Figure 6-17. Generic prelaunch checklists.


6-10

Glider Care

32874
Depending on the type of glider, different cleaning methods should be employed. After all flights, the pilot or ground 
personnel can wipe down the glider with a soft cloth or a wet chamois. This removes any debris or bugs. Delaying this 
process allows bugs to dry and makes removal difficult.

32875
Gliders made of fabric should be cleaned with spray-on and wash-off products. Anyone cleaning a glider should avoid using 
large amounts of water as the water may penetrate cracks and holes, especially on earlier wood or fabric gliders, which 
damages and reduces the life of the wood or fabric. Persistent and prolonged moisture exposure can damage any glider 
over time. On metal gliders, personnel can use a low-pressure hose and mild detergent for cleaning. High-performance 
fiberglass gliders use a special spray or paste for cleaning. Care must be taken when using a powered buffer, as the buffer 
may burn the fiberglass if not used in a proper manner. Anyone cleaning a canopy should use only recommended cleaners 
for that purpose. The GFH/POH or a glider supply store or organization can suggest appropriate cleaning materials based 
on the type of glider.

32876
After cleaning, a coat of wax or a sealer may be applied to fabric, metal, and fiberglass gliders. However, wax containing 
silicon adheres to the pores of fiberglass and complicates future fiberglass repair. After applying any wax, personnel may 
use a clean, soft cloth to wipe off excess wax and buff the area by hand.

32877
An owner or pilot may perform minor repairs on a fiberglass glider such as fixing a scratch or a chip. Individuals should 
consult a fiberglass expert prior to making any minor repair and use approved parts and materials when conducting these 
repairs. All gliders, including those certified as standard or experimental, should be repaired in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommended procedures and 14 CFR part 43.

Preventive Maintenance

32878
Pilots may conduct preventive maintenance on their glider. Preventive maintenance does not involve complex assembly 
operations. For the list of permissible pilot-performed maintenance activities and for more information on preventive 
maintenance, refer to Appendix A of 14 CFR Part 43, Major Alterations, Major Repairs, and Preventive Maintenance found 
at www.ecfr.gov.

58246

Chapter Summary

46851
This chapter introduces recommended safety practices for assembly, storage, tie-down, securing, and ground handling for 
a glider. The final authority for any glider is the specific Flight Manual or Pilot’s Operating Handbook (POH) developed 
by the aircraft manufacturer and approved by the FAA.


