8-1

Introduction

34198
Glider pilots train for abnormal and emergency procedures in case of control problems, instrument failures, or equipment 
malfunctions. In addition, since forced landings may occur due to inadequate lift on a cross-country flight, glider pilots 
should understand how to use emergency equipment and survival gear as a practical necessity.

Aerotow Abnormal & Emergency Procedures

34248
Environmental factors, pilot error, and mechanical equipment failure can cause an abnormality during aerotow. The tow 
and glider pilots should avoid situations that would place the other pilot at risk. Should a situation arise where the glider 
position threatens the safety of the tow plane, the glider pilot may have no other choice but to release the tow rope.

Environmental Factors

34260
Environmental factors for terminating the tow include encountering clouds, mountain rotors (area of turbulence created by 
wind and mountainous terrain), or restricted visibility. Any of these factors may require the glider pilot to release.

Pilot Error

34261
Examples of tow-pilot errors include starting the takeoff before the glider pilot gives the ready signal, using steep 
banks during the aerotow without prior consent of the glider pilot, or frivolous use of aerotow signals, such as “release 
immediately!” For the glider pilot, examples of pilot error include allowing the glider to get out of position during the tow, 
losing sight of the towplane, or leaving air brakes open during takeoff and climb.

Kiting

32926
A hazardous situation may occur during takeoff if the glider pilot flies high above and loses sight of the towplane. If the 
tension on the tow line pulls the towplane tail up, the tow pilot may run out of up-elevator authority. In addition to a the 
towplane experiencing a nose down pitching moment, it is also loosing airspeed. The kiting glider creates a huge amount 
of drag which slows the towplane. It can take 1,500 feet or more for the towplane to recover once the rope breaks or the 
glider pilot releases.

Unintended Spoiler Deployment

32927
Spoiler-related emergencies often result from a pilot’s failure to lock the spoilers in the closed position prior to takeoff. 
As the glider accelerates down the runway, or soon after it becomes airborne, the airflow deploys the spoilers, greatly 
increasing the glider’s drag. The pilot may not notice the spoilers open, but the increased drag can make it impossible 
for the tow pilot to climb and clear obstacles. A release by the tow pilot leaves the glider low to the ground and in a high 
drag configuration. If the glider pilot does not recognize the situation, and close the spoilers, an unsafe landing becomes 
likely. If conditions permit a continued climb the towpilot can waggle the rudder to indicate something is wrong with the 
glider. The glider pilot should differentiate between the towpilot rocking the wings indicating release immediately, and the 
towpilot fanning the rudder indicating something is wrong with the glider, avoiding an unnecessary release.

51180
If time allows, the tow pilot can use the radio and warn the glider pilot to close the spoilers. Without using radio, the tow 
pilot can use the “Rudder Waggle” signal for the glider pilot to check the glider. The glider pilot should not confuse this 
signal with the “Wing Rock” signal for the glider pilot to release the tow rope. This mistake would leave the glider pilot at 
low altitude with the spoilers open and make a safe landing very difficult.

Chapter 8:  Abnormal & Emergency 
Procedures


8-2

Mechanical Failures

34262
Mechanical equipment failures include tow hook failures, towplane mechanical or airframe failures, and glider airframe 
failures. The tow pilot rocks the wings of the towplane to request an immediate release by the glider pilot. [Figure 8-1 right 
panel] The glider pilot may deliberately terminate the tow or launch anytime it seems safer than continuing. For example, 
if the glider pilot discovers control binding once air pressure builds on the surfaces, releasing the tow line seems less risky 
than continuing. If a mechanical failure occurs, the glider pilot should assess the situation and determine the best course 
of action. Options include remaining on the aerotow, planning to release at a point in the future, or releasing immediately.

34250

Glider: Release immediately

Towplane rocks wings
Glider cannot release

Glider moves to left side of towplane
and rocks wings

Towplane cannot release

After receiving signal that 
glider cannot release, 
towplane yaws repeatedly

Figure 8-1. Towplane and glider signals due to release mechanism failure (left and center panels) and towplane signal commanding 

glider release (right panel).

blank

34252
Tow release failure can occur in either the towplane or the glider tow hook system. If the glider release mechanism fails, 
the glider pilot should notify the tow pilot either by radio or tow signal as depicted in the left panel of Figure 8-1 above, 
and the glider should maintain the high tow position. The tow pilot should tow the glider over the gliderport or airport 
and release the glider from the towplane. The towline should fall back and below the glider. The design of some tow hook 
mechanisms allows the line to pull free from the glider by its own weight. After release by the towplane and since some 
glider hooks do not back release, the glider pilot should pull the release to increase the likelihood of a towline release from 
the glider. In the rare event the tow pilot also cannot release, the tow pilot will yaw the tow plane repeatedly as shown in 
the enter panel of Figure 8-1 above.

34254
tow planes often use a variant of the Schweizer or Tost glider tow hitch. [Figure 8-2] and [Figure 8-3] The hitch connects 
to the tow plane fuselage below the rudder. The specific rings that attach tow lines to these hitch types can be seen in 
Figure 8-4. The wing runner should know the correct method of attachment. If the tow plane has the Schweizer tow hitch, 
the tow ring may rotate forward and trap the sleeve that locks the tow hitch in place if the glider flies too far above the tow 
plane during the tow. This may prevent the tow pilot from releasing the tow line. [Figure 8-5]


8-3

34255

Towhook closed
Towhook open

Figure 8-2. A Schweizer tow hitch.

34256

Ring

Hook

Figure 8-3. A Tost tow hitch.


8-4

34257

Schweizer ring

Tost ring

Figure 8-4. Examples of Schweizer and Tost tow rings.

34258

Excessive pressure here

Tow ring

Pilot can not override
excessive pressure with
cockpit release handle.

Tow hook pulled up

Glider excessively
high on tow

Figure 8-5 A Schweizer tow hitch under upward tension.

34259
Failure of the release mechanism in both towplane and glider occurs very rarely. If it does occur, radio or tow signals 
between glider pilot and tow pilot should confirm the situation. One option has the glider and towplane landing without 
releasing from one another. Once a descent to the gliderport or airport begins in this scenario, the glider pilot should move 
to and maintain the low-tow position and use spoilers/dive brakes to avoid overtaking the towplane. The tow pilot should 
plan a shallow approach that avoids obstacles and allows the glider to touch down first. The towplane could experience a 
hard landing if the glider pilot uses the wheel brake excessively and slows the towplane below its flying speed. The glider 
pilot should use the spoilers or dive brakes to stay on the runway and use the wheel brake only as necessary to avoid 
overtaking the towplane.

51156
A second option in a dual release failure situation involves the glider pilot breaking the towline while within gliding 
distance of the landing field; however, using this slack-line procedure increases risk of entanglement and could damage 
the glider or towplane if the line does not break as designed. The pilot flies the glider above the towplane, dives down to 
develop slackline, and then fully extends the dive brakes and/or spoilers to induce a tension overload. As the towplane 
accelerates without the load of the glider and the glider decelerates due to the increase in drag, the towline should come 


8-5

under sudden tension and break free. If the glider pilot cannot verify that the line break occurred at the glider's weak link, 
the glider pilot should land using the landing procedure for an attached line in the GFM/POH.

34263
The following sections discuss five tow failure situations for which a pilot should have a plan. While the best course of 
action depends on many variables, such as runway length, airport environment, density altitude, and wind, all tow failures 
or emergency releases have one thing in common: the need to maintain control of the glider. For example, the pilot should 
avoid stalling the glider or dragging a wingtip on the ground during a low altitude turn.

Tow Failure with Sufficient Runway To Land and Stop

34266
If a tow failure or deliberate release occurs prior to towplane lift-off, the towplane either continues the takeoff or aborts the 
takeoff. If the towplane aborts the takeoff, the tow pilot should maneuver the towplane to the left side of the runway. For 
a glider still on the runway, the glider pilot should pull the release, decelerate using the wheel brake, and maneuver to the 
right side of the runway. If the glider becomes airborne, the glider pilot should pull the towline release, land ahead, and be 
prepared to maneuver to the right side of the runway. [Figure 8-6, panel 1] Pulling the towline release in either case ensures 
that the rope remains clear of the glider. Since local procedures vary, both the glider pilot and tow pilot should know any 
specific gliderport or airport procedures.

34267

Very low altitude, premature release/
rope break with runway still available. 
Land on runway, use wheel brake to 
stop. If necessary, alter course to the
right to avoid towplane.

1

Very low altitude, premature release/
rope break with insufficient runway 
available. Land ahead, use wheel break 
to stop.

2

Wind

800 feet above the runway, if suitable,
turn into the wind for course reversal,
land downwind.

4

Above 200 feet, if suitable, turn into wind and
make course reversal, land downwind.

3

Wind

Figure 8-6. Situations for tow line break, uncommanded release, or power loss of the towplane.


8-6

Tow Failure after Takeoff—Glider Unable to Return to Airport

34268
When an inadvertent release, tow line break, or a signal to release from the towplane occurs at a point at which the glider 
has neither sufficient runway directly ahead to land nor sufficient altitude (typically 200 feet above ground level) to make 
a safe turn back to the field, the pilot should land the glider ahead. [Figure 8-6, panel 2] Glider pilots should consider any 
attempt to turn at low altitude prior to landing as high risk because of the likelihood of dragging a wingtip on the ground 
or stalling the glider. Landing ahead and slowing the glider as much as possible prior to touchdown and rolling onto 
unfamiliar terrain often provides the best outcome. Low speed means low impact forces, which reduce the likelihood of 
pilot injury or damage to the glider. Glider pilots should look on both sides and ahead when choosing the best area for an 
off-field landing. While more altitude provides more range during an emergency, landing under control supersedes getting 
to a “perfect” landing area almost within glide distance.

Tow Failure above Return to Runway Altitude

34269
A glider pilot may consider and attempt a downwind landing on the departure runway if the glider possesses sufficient 
altitude to make a course reversal. [Figure 8-6, panel 3]

34270
The pilot should only attempt a course reversal and downwind landing option if within gliding distance of the airport or 
landing area. In ideal conditions, this maneuver typically requires a minimum altitude of 200 feet above ground level. If 
there are strong headwinds, the pilot should consider that the glider will reach 200 feet AGL with less distance traveled 
across the ground. This may allow for landing-ahead options on the existing runway compared to reversing course, landing 
with less return runway available, at a considerably higher groundspeed, and possibly risking overshooting the entire 
runway on return.

34271
The glider pilot has responsibility to avoid the towplane if the tow terminates due to a towplane emergency. Since, the tow 
pilot deals with that emergency and may maneuver the aircraft abruptly, the glider pilot should never follow the towplane 
down.

34272
After releasing from the towplane at low altitude and if the glider pilot chooses to make a turn of approximately 180° 
for a downwind landing, the pilot should maintain flying speed. The pilot should immediately lower the nose to a pitch 
attitude that maintains the appropriate airspeed. If a rope break occurred, the glider pilot should release the rope portion 
still attached to the glider to avoid any entanglement.

34273
During a course reversal, the pilot should make the initial turn into any crosswind using a 45° bank angle. This bank angle 
provides a safe margin above stall speed, incurs an acceptable amount of altitude loss, and completes a course reversal 
in a timely manner. Using a shallow bank angle may not allow enough time for the glider to align with the landing area. 
An excessively steep bank angle may result in an accelerated stall or wingtip ground contact. Provided the departure 
drifted downwind and the pilot makes the turn back to the field into the crosswind, the glider may only need minor 
additional course corrections to align with the intended landing area. Throughout the maneuver, the pilot should maintain 
the appropriate approach speed and proper coordination to maximize range.

34274
While downwind landings result in higher groundspeeds, the glider pilot should maintain the appropriate approach airspeed. 
Landing downwind results in a shallower than normal approach, and the pilot may use spoilers or dive brakes to control 
the descent path during the straight-in portion of the approach. Higher groundspeed becomes especially noticeable during 
the flare. After touchdown, the pilot should use the spoilers or dive brakes and use wheel brakes to slow and stop the glider 
before any loss of directional control. During the latter part of the roll-out, the glider may feel unresponsive to the controls 
even though rolling along the runway at a higher than normal groundspeed.

Tow Failure above 800' AGL

34275
When the emergency occurs at or above 800 feet above the ground, the glider pilot has more time to assess the situation. 
Depending on the gliderport or airport environment, the pilot may choose to land on a cross runway, into the wind on the 
departure runway, or on a taxiway. [Figure 8-6, panel 4] In some situations, an off-gliderport or off-airport landing may be 
safer than attempting to land on the gliderport or airport.


8-7

Tow Failure above Traffic Pattern Altitude

34276
If an emergency occurs above the traffic pattern altitude, the glider pilot should maneuver away from the towplane, and 
release the tow line if still attached. The glider pilot should turn toward the gliderport or airport while evaluating the 
situation and then decide whether to search for lift or make an immediate return to the gliderport or airport for landing. 
Pilots should remember their obligation when dropping objects (such as a tow line) from an aircraft according to Title 14 
of the Code of Federal Regulations part 91, section 91.15, and not create a hazard to persons and property on the ground. 
[Figure 8-12, panel 4]

Slack Line

34277
Slack line is a reduction of tension in the tow line. If the slack is severe enough, it might entangle the glider or cause 
damage to the glider or towplane. The following situations may result in a slack line:

32974

• Abrupt power reduction by the towplane

32975

• Aerotow descents

34280

• Glider turns inside the towplane turn radius [Figure 8-7]

32977

• Updrafts and downdrafts

34282

• Abrupt recovery from a wake box corner position

52125

• Glider dives toward towplane [Figure 8-8]

34283

Glider turns toward inside of
towplane turn. Glider slows, 
slack towline develops.

Figure 8-7. Glider bank steeper than that of towplane, causing slack in tow line.


8-8

34284

Glider, having risen too high above towplane, 
dives toward towplane, inducing slack towline.

Figure 8-8. One method of generating tow line slack.

34285
When the towplane precedes the glider into an updraft, the glider pilot perceives the towplane as climbing faster and higher 
than the glider. Then, as the glider enters the updraft, it climbs higher and faster than the towplane did. As a result, the 
glider pilot pitches the glider over to regain the proper tow altitude, gains airspeed more quickly than the towplane, and 
creates a slack tow line.

34286
A glider pilot should initiate slack tow line recovery procedures as soon possible by increasing drag. For example, the glider 
pilot may slip back into alignment with the towplane. If slipping motion fails to reduce the slack sufficiently, careful use 
of spoilers/dive brakes can decelerate the glider and take up the slack. As the tow line tightens and the tow stabilizes, the 
glider pilot removes the extra drag and resumes the desired aerotow position. The glider pilot should immediately release 
from the aerotow if the slack in the tow line becomes excessive or gets beyond the pilot’s capability to recover safely.

34287
Common errors regarding a slack line include:

32983

• Failure to take corrective action at the first indication of a slack line.

32984

• Improper procedure to correct slack line causing excessive stress on the tow line, towplane, and the glider.

34290

• Failure to decrease drag as tow line slack decreases.

Ground Launch Abnormal & Emergency Procedures

39243

Abnormal Procedures

34292
The launch equipment operator manages a speed-controlled winch some distance from the glider, and the initial tow speed 
and tension could vary. A tow line speed too great could exceed glider limitations while a speed too low may make liftoff 
difficult, prevent further climb after liftoff, or result in stall after takeoff. The pilot should use appropriate radio calls and 
augment with visual signals if necessary, to direct the launch operator to increase or decrease speed. The pilot should 
release the tow line and land ahead if an abnormal situation develops.

51184
A launch mechanism malfunction may interrupt a ground launch. A gradual deceleration in rate of climb or airspeed may 
be an indication of this type of malfunction. If suspecting a launch mechanism malfunction, the glider pilot should release 
and land ahead. However, a pilot might confuse an unintended opening of the spoilers with a winch malfunction if the 
pilot does not notice the spoilers opening. The pilot should quickly check the status of the spoilers if performance appears 
degraded during the tow.

34293
Wind gradient (a sudden increase in windspeed with height) can have a noticeable effect on ground launches. A significant 
or sudden wind gradient may increase indicated airspeed and exceed the maximum ground launch tow speed. [Figure 8-9] 
When encountering a wind gradient, the pilot should push forward on the stick to reduce the tension on the tow line, which 
reduces indicated airspeed. The only way for the glider to resume climb without exceeding the maximum ground launch 


8-9

airspeed involves signaling the launch operator to reduce tow speed. After the reduction of towing speed, the pilot can 
resume normal climb. If launching using a winch with automatic tension control, the glider pilot uses conventional pitch 
changes to control airspeed and climbs at a higher rate if wind speed increases in a gradient.

34294

20

30

40

50
60

70

80

90

20

30

40

50
60

70

80

90

Wind 20 knots

Wind 10 knots

Effect of wind gradient on airspeed 
during ground launch. Pilot must 
monitor airspeed indicator carefully. 
Goal is to fly fast enough to maintain 
a safe margin above stall speed, but
slower than maximum permitted 
ground launch airspeed.

Figure 8-9. Ground launch wind gradient.

Emergency Procedures

34296
A broken tow line may cause an emergency during a ground launch. [Figure 8-10] When a tow line failure occurs, the glider 
pilot should pull the release handle, immediately lower the nose of the glider, and maintain a safe airspeed. Distinguishing 
features of the ground launch include nose-high pitch attitude and a relatively low altitude for a significant portion of the 
launch and climb. If a tow line break occurs and the glider pilot fails to respond promptly, the nose-high attitude of the 
glider may result in a stall.

34297

Very early break: land straight ahead. Tow vehicle, if used, should clear runway to make way for the glider.

SNAP

Airborne break: lower nose and promptly land straight ahead.

SNAP

If towline is parachute equipped, avoid parachute when lowering nose after towline break or normal release.

Figure 8-10. Ground launch tow line break.


8-10

34298
If the glider tow release mechanism fails, the pilot should fly at airspeeds no lower than best lift over drag (L/D) airspeed. 
The pilot should fly over and then past the ground launch equipment. This method allows the glider tow hook back release 
to activate or the tow line weak link to fail. The ground launch equipment also uses an emergency release mechanism in 
the event the glider tow release fails. Winches should have a guillotine to cut the tow line, if necessary. If using a motor 
vehicle for a ground launch, it should also have some form of backup release mechanism.

Self-Launch Takeoff Emergency Procedures

34300
Prior to takeoff, the pilot should formulate emergency plans for any type of failure that might occur. Thorough knowledge 
of aircraft performance data, normal takeoff and landing procedures, and emergency procedures as outlined in the GFM/
POH help bring about the successful management of any emergency.

34301
Mismanagement of the aircraft systems through lack of knowledge may cause serious difficulty. For instance, if the spoilers 
or dive brakes remain open during takeoff and climb or open inadvertently, the self-launching glider may not generate 
sufficient excess power to continue climbing. Other emergency situations may include inflight fire, structural failure, 
encounters with severe turbulence, wind shear, canopy failure, and inadvertent encounter with instrument meteorological 
conditions (IMC).

34302
Possible options for handling emergencies depend on altitude above the terrain, wind, and weather conditions. As a part 
of preflight planning, pilots should review the effects of density altitude on glider performance, the takeoff runway length, 
landing areas near the gliderport, and potential air traffic that could affect the pilot’s approach and landing decisions. 
Emergency options may include landing ahead on the remaining runway, landing off field, or returning to the gliderport 
to land on an available runway. The appropriate emergency procedures may be found in the GFM/POH for the specific 
self-launching glider.

Spiral Dives

34303
An excessive low-nose attitude during a steep turn may result in a significant increase in airspeed and loss in altitude, 
which indicates a spiral dive. If the pilot attempts to recover from this situation by applying back elevator pressure only, the 
limiting load factor may be exceeded, causing structural failure. To recover from a spiral dive, the pilot should first reduce 
the angle of bank with coordinated use of the rudder and aileron, and then smoothly increase pitch to the proper attitude.

34304
Common errors during spiral dives include: 

34305

• Failure to recognize when a spiral dive develops.

34306

• Rough, abrupt, or uncoordinated control application during recovery.

34307

• Improper sequence of control applications.

Spins

34308
During a spin, the glider follows a downward corkscrew path. A spin entry may occur after an aggravated stall of one or 
both wings that results in rotation around the vertical axis.  As the glider rotates around the vertical axis, the outer wing 
develops more lift and less drag than the inner stalled wing, creating a rolling, yawing, and pitching motion. [Figure 8-11] 
The pilot may not realize that the critical angle of attack has been exceeded until the glider yaws toward the lowering wing.


8-11

34309

Flight path

Relative wind

Figure 8-11. Autorotation of spinning glider.

34312
Many gliders need considerable effort to enter a spin and require good judgment and technique to intentionally enter a spin. 
However, these same gliders may enter a spin accidentally if the pilot mishandles the controls in turns, stalls, and flight at 
minimum controllable airspeeds. This fact explains why pilots should practice stalls and develop the ability to recognize 
and recover from them.

34314
Continued practice of stall recognition and recovery helps the pilot develop an instinctive and prompt reaction to prevent 
a spin. The pilot should apply immediate corrective action any time the glider approaches spin conditions, and the pilot 
should immediately execute spin recovery procedures if a spin occurs.

34315
A flight instructor may demonstrate spins and spin recovery techniques with emphasis on any special spin procedures or 
techniques required for a particular glider. Before beginning any spin operations, the following items should be reviewed:

34316

• GFM/POH limitations section, placards, or type certification data sheet, to determine if the glider is approved for 

spins.

21161

• Weight and balance limitations.

34318

• Proper recommended entry and recovery procedures.

34319

• Any requirements for parachutes as given in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 91.


8-12

34320
Before any flight, and especially one with intentional spins planned, pilots should check for excess or loose items that may 
affect the weight, CG, and controllability of the glider. Slack control cables (particularly rudder and elevator) could prevent 
full control deflections and delay or preclude recovery in some gliders.

34321
Prior to initiation of a spin, the pilots should check the flight area above and below the glider for other air traffic and not 
spin if any conflict exists. Clearing the area may occur while slowing the glider for the spin entry. All spin training should 
initiate at an altitude high enough for a completed recovery at or above 1,500 feet AGL and within gliding distance of a 
landing area. The following paragraphs describe four phases of a spin.

Entry Phase

34322
In the entry phase, the pilot provides the necessary elements for the spin. The spin demonstration entry procedure begins 
much like a stall. However, as the glider approaches a stall, the pilot smoothly applies full rudder in the direction selected 
for spin rotation and full back (up) elevator to the limit of travel. The pilot should maintain the ailerons in the neutral 
position during the spin procedure unless the GFM/POH specifies otherwise.

Incipient Phase

34323
The incipient phase begins as the glider stalls and rotation begins. As an incipient spin develops, the indicated airspeed 
should read near or below stall airspeed. This phase can run until the spin develops fully, which may take up to two turns 
for most gliders. Instructors commonly use an incipient spin for introduction to spin training and begin recovery prior to 
the first of 360° of rotation. In this phase, the aerodynamic and inertial forces have not achieved a balance.

Developed Phase

34324
The developed phase occurs when the glider’s angular rotation rate, airspeed, and vertical speed stabilize with the glider 
in a nearly vertical flightpath. Equilibrium occurs in this phase as aerodynamic forces and inertial forces balance and the 
attitude, angles, and self-sustaining motions about the vertical axis become constant or repetitive.

Recovery Phase

34325
This phase may last for a quarter turn to several turns. To accomplish spin recovery, pilots should follow the manufacturer’s 
recommended procedures. In the absence of the manufacturer’s recommended spin recovery procedures, pilots should 
follow the following steps for general spin recovery:

34326

1. Ailerons to neutral. Ailerons may have an adverse effect on spin recovery. Aileron control in the direction of the 

spin may increase the rate of rotation and delay the recovery. Aileron control opposite the direction of the spin may 
cause the down aileron to move the wing deeper into the stall and aggravate the situation. Retract flaps, if extended, 
as soon as possible after spin entry.

34327

2. Apply full opposite rudder against the rotation. Ensure full (against the stop) opposite rudder until rotation stops. 

As spin rotation stops, neutralize the rudder. If not neutralized at this time, the deflected rudder may cause a yawing 
effect in the opposite direction.

34328

3. When rotation stops, apply a positive and brisk, straightforward movement of the elevator control past neutral to 

recover from the stall. Slow and overly cautious control movements during spin recovery may result in the glider 
continuing to spin indefinitely, even with anti-spin inputs. A brisk and positive technique, on the other hand, results 
in a more positive spin recovery. Hold the controls firmly in this position until airspeed begins increasing.

34330

4. With rotation stopped, angle of attack below the critical angle, and nose-down attitude, airspeed increases rapidly. 

Make smooth pitch control input of sufficient magnitude. Pulling up aggressively may cause a second stall and spin 
during the recovery. Waiting too long to pull up could lead to high airspeed and excessive G-loading.


8-13

34331
The FAA recommends these recovery procedures for use only in the absence of the manufacturer’s procedures. Before any 
pilot begins spin training, the pilot should understand any spin recovery procedures provided by the manufacturer.

34332
The most common problems in spin recovery include pilot confusion when determining the direction of spin rotation and 
whether the maneuver constitutes a spin or a spiral dive. An inclinometer does not indicate the direction of a spin. A high 
or increasing airspeed indicates a spiral dive. In a spin, the airspeed reads at or below stalling speed.

34333
Common errors when encountering/practicing spins include: 

34334

• Failure to clear area before a spin.

34335

• Failure to establish proper configuration prior to spin entry.

34336

• Failure to correct airspeed for spin entry.

34337

• Failure to recognize conditions leading to a spin.

34338

• Failure to achieve and maintain stall during spin entry.

34339

• Improper use of controls during spin entry, rotation, or recovery.

34340

• Disorientation during spin.

34341

• Failure to distinguish a spiral dive from a spin.

34342

• Excessive speed or secondary stall during spin recovery.

34343

• Failure to recover before descent below safe altitude.

34344

• Failure to recover with a landing area within gliding distance.

Off-Field Landing Procedures

34345
Off-field landings may occur in the vicinity of the launching airport due to unexpected rapid weather deterioration, a 
significant change in wind direction, unanticipated amounts of sinking air, disorientation, lack of situational awareness, 
tow failures, and other emergencies. In these situations, a precautionary off-field landing may present less risk than an 
approach back to the airport. If the pilot loses sight of the airport or if the glide back to the airport comes up short for any 
reason, the attempt to return to the airport may result in damage to the glider or injury to the pilot.

34346
A glider pilot should always be prepared for off-field landings as the absence of sufficient lift may require an off-field 
landing. Even when flying in a self-launching glider, the engine or power system could fail.

34347
The basic ingredients for a successful off-field landing include an awareness of wind direction, wind strength at the 
surface, and obstacles along the approach path. The glider pilot should select suitable landing areas while airborne with 
sufficient height and time to plan and perform a safe approach and landing, and then make an accurate landing to the actual 
selected field.

34348
These basic ingredients for a successful off-field landing can be summarized as follows:

34349

• Recognizing the possibility of imminent off-field landing.

34350

• Selecting a suitable area, then a suitable landing field within that area.

34351

• Planning the approach with wind, obstacles, and local terrain in mind.


8-14

34352

• Executing the approach, landing, and stopping the glider as soon as possible.

34353

• Contacting ground crew and notifying them of the off-field landing location.

34354
Denial represents the most common off-field landing planning failure. The pilot experiencing denial finds it easier to focus 
on continuing the flight and attempting to find a way to climb back up and fly away. This false optimism leaves little or no 
time to plan an off-field landing if the attempt to climb fails.

34355
When planning an off-field landing, flying downwind offers more range and a greater area to search than flying upwind. 
After selection of a landing zone, wind awareness allows the pilot to plan the orientation and direction of a landing approach 
into the wind to shorten the landing roll. Pilots should visualize the wind flowing over and around the intended landing area 
including how low altitude turbulence may exist in the area downwind of hills, buildings, and other obstructions.

34356
Pilots should use a methodical approach to an off-field landing based on a set of decision heights. The pilot should select 
a general landing area no lower than 2,000 feet above ground level (AGL) and select the intended landing field no lower 
than 1,500 feet AGL. At 1,000 feet AGL, the pilot should commit to flying the approach and landing.

34357
Pilots should consider safety rather than an easy retrieval as the highest priority when selecting a landing site. During an 
off-field landing approach, the pilot will likely not know the precise elevation of the landing site. Since this makes the 
altimeter less useful, the pilot should fly the approach and assess the progress by recognizing and maintaining the angle that 
brings the glider to the intended aiming point for the landing site. When landing with a tailwind (due to slope or one-way 
entry into the selected field due to terrain or obstacles), the pilot should use a shallower approach angle.

51157
A good approach clears each visible obstacle, including clearing any poles and wires by a safe margin. From the air, wires 
may not appear until right in front of the pilot, whereas towers supporting wires appear from a greater distance. The pilot 
should assume that wires run between telephone poles, supporting structures, and buildings. The pilot should plan to 
overfly any wires that may be present, even if not actually seeing them.

34358
The pilot should select a field of adequate length and one with no visible slope, when possible. Any slope visible from 
the air becomes steep when close to the ground. Color may assist in assessment of slope. High spots often appear lighter 
in color than low spots because soil moisture tends to collect in low spots and darkens the color of the soil. If the landing 
will occur on a slope, landing uphill works better than downhill. With a slight downhill grade, the glider will stay airborne 
longer and experience a longer landing roll, which may result in a collision with objects at the far end of the selected field.

34359
A pilot familiar with the colors of local seasonal vegetation can identify crops and other vegetation from the air. Tall crops 
generally present more danger than low crops. Pilots should also avoid discontinuities such as lines or crop changes since 
these discontinuities often indicate the presence of a fence, ditch, irrigation pipe, or some other obstacle or machinery that 
could damage a glider.

34360
The recommended approach procedure should include the following legs:

34361

• Crosswind leg on the downwind side of the field

34362

• Upwind leg

34363

• Crosswind leg on the upwind side of the field

34364

• Downwind leg

34365

• Base leg

34366

• Final approach


8-15

34367
This approach procedure provides the opportunity to see the intended landing area from all sides. Pilots should use 
every opportunity while flying an off-field approach to inspect the landing area and look for obstacles or other hazards. 
[Figure 8-12]

34368

This off-field landing approach offers a good
view of the landing area from all sides.

Figure 8-12. Off-field landing approach.

34369
The pilot should also consider how obstacles affect the length of landing area available for touchdown, roll out, and 
stopping the glider. Flying over an obstacle 50 feet high means the glider will overfly the first 500 feet or so of the landing 
area during the descent to flare and landing. If the selected field has obstacles on the final approach path, the field should 
also allow for the descent, flare, and landing roll after clearing the obstacle.

34370
Aerodynamic drag works better than wheel brakes at flying speeds. Pilots who hold the glider off during the flare and touch 
down at the lowest safe speed will land within a shorter distance. After touchdown, using the wheel brake immediately will 
stop the glider and help prevent collision with any unseen obstacles.


8-16

Afterlanding Off Field

39243

Off-Field Landing without Injury

34372
A pilot should tend to personal needs first, secure the glider, and then contact the retrieval crew. If cell service exists, the 
pilot can use a cell phone to call the retrieval crew. To help identify position, the pilot should relay the GPS coordinates. 
Pilots should write down the coordinates in case the GPS loses power. If able, calling other glider pilots in the area on the 
glider-to-glider radio frequency or calling the tow plane can assist with retrieval.

34373
Once contact has been made to arrange for retrieval, the pilot may collect any special tools needed for glider de-rigging or 
installing gust locks on the glider’s flight controls. Since a normal retrieval depends on location, weather and time of day, 
the pilot may need to set up equipment to handle the current or expected environmental conditions.

Off-Field Landing with Injury or Emergency

34374
A pilot should address any critical injuries and contact emergency response personnel, other aircraft, or any other source of 
identifiable assistance. If cell coverage exists, the pilot can dial 911, speak to an operator, and provide a clear description 
of the location. If cell service does not work, a pilot may use the glider radio, if operable, to broadcast a Mayday distress 
call on emergency frequency 121.5 MHz. Many aircraft, including civil airliners, routinely monitor this frequency. Their 
altitude gives the line-of-sight aviation transceiver enhanced range when transmitting or receiving. The pilot may try any 
other frequency likely to elicit a response such as glider air-to-air frequency or the tow plane frequency. Some gliders 
have an Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) on board. A pilot needing emergency assistance should activate the ELT, if 
available. While 14 CFR, part 91, section 91.207 does not pertain to gliders, an ELT or EPIRB adds safety when flying a 
glider on a cross-country. Personal locator devices offered by several companies use the 406 MHz satellite signal, and GPS 
technology to accurately track and relay the pilot’s location in the event of an off-field landing that requires emergency 
assistance. Additionally, pilots may elect to carry satellite communications and tracking devices that allow communication 
even outside of cell coverage.

34375
If the glider comes to rest in a precarious position, the pilot should secure the aircraft if able. An injured pilot should stay 
with the glider. Rescue personnel can locate the glider more easily from the air than locate an individual. The pilot might 
obtain protection from the elements by crawling into the fuselage, crawling under a wing, or using any parachute canopy 
to rig a makeshift tent around the glider structure. After attending to medical needs and contacting rescue personnel, the 
pilot should attend to clothing, food, and water issues. The pilot should make every attempt to conserve energy. If unsafe to 
stay with the glider, the pilot should move to a nearby location for shelter but leave clear written instructions in a prominent 
location in the glider detailing the shelter location.

System & Equipment Malfunctions

39243

Flight Instrument Malfunctions

34377
Instrument failures can result from improper maintenance practices, internal instrument failure, or an external cause. 
Improper airspeed indicator maintenance might involve failure to connect the instrument correctly to pitot and static lines. 
External failures include clogging from insects or ice.

34378
Pilots should practice setting normal attitudes for all flight regimes using outside cues including the skills needed to make a 
safe approach without a functioning airspeed indicator or altimeter. In fact, many older and vintage gliders do not require an 
operational altimeter. A flight review or periodic instruction provides an excellent opportunity to review these procedures.

34381
Static line contamination affects both the altimeter and the airspeed indicator. If either instrument malfunctions because 
of static line contamination, the indications of the other instrument may also be incorrect. The pilot should use external 
cues and evaluate the indications of any instrument connected to the static port. If in doubt about the accuracy of the 
instruments, the pilot should not rely on the instrument indications. After landing and prior to the next flight, an aviation 
maintenance professional should evaluate the instrument system.


8-17

Altimeter Malfunctions

34380
During the approach to land without a functioning altimeter, the pilot should assess the angle to the target area frequently. 
Entering the approach from an apparent normal height, or even from a higher-than-normal height provides a margin of 
safety. If the current descent angle would overfly the target, the pilot applies spoilers or dive brakes to steepen the descent 
angle. If necessary, a forward slip or turning slip dissipates excess altitude. If the approach angle will result in a landing 
short of the target, the pilot should close the spoilers or dive brakes and can modify the approach path to shorten the 
distance to the targeted landing area as needed.

Airspeed Indicator Malfunctions

34379
If the airspeed indicator appears to be erratic or inaccurate, the pilot should fly the glider by pitch attitude for best glide or 
minimum sink airspeed. Additional airspeed cues include control response and wind noise. At very low airspeeds, controls 
feel mushy and wind noise is generally low. At higher airspeeds, control becomes crisper and wind noise takes on a more 
insistent hissing quality. The pilot may amplify the sound of the relative wind by opening the sliding window installed in 
the canopy and by opening the air vent control. Turbulent or gusty wind conditions generally require additional airspeed to 
ensure adequate control authority. If in doubt, flying slightly faster than optimum airspeed provides a safety margin above 
stall speed.  However, a speed higher than best glide airspeed increases the rate of descent and decreases range.

Variometer Malfunctions

34383
Variometer failure makes it difficult for the pilot to locate and exploit sources of lift. If near an airport, the pilot may elect 
to make a precautionary landing so troubleshooting and repair can take place. Without a nearby airport, the pilot can look 
for clues to sources of lift. The pilot can use the altimeter to gauge rate of climb or descent in the absence of a functioning 
variometer. Tapping the altimeter with a finger often overcomes internal friction in the altimeter, allowing the hand to move 
upward or downward. The direction of the movement gives an idea of the rate of climb or descent over the last few seconds.

Compass Malfunctions

34384
If the compass performs poorly or not at all, the pilot should cross-check current position with aeronautical charts and with 
electronic methods of navigation, such as GPS, if available. The position of the sun, combined with knowledge of the time 
of day, can also help with orientation. Section lines, major roads, and prominent landmarks often provide helpful cues for 
orientation and the direction of flight.

Glider Canopy Malfunctions

39243

Glider Canopy Opens Unexpectedly

34386
Canopy-related emergencies often result from pilot failure to lock the canopy in the closed position prior to takeoff. If 
the canopy opens in flight, the pilot should focus on flying the glider. The pilot should maintain adequate airspeed while 
selecting a suitable landing area. An open canopy causes higher than normal drag, and the pilot should plan a steeper-than-
normal descent path.

34387
If the canopy opens while on aerotow, the pilot should maintain a normal flying attitude and tow position. The glider pilot 
should not attempt to close the canopy or release prematurely. After continuing to climb with the tow plane to several 
thousand feet above the ground and releasing the tow rope, the pilot may try to close the canopy only if able to maintain 
glider control. If flying with a passenger on board and conditions allow, the pilot can direct the passenger to close and lock 
the canopy.

Broken Glider Canopy

34388
If the canopy breaks during flight, the best response involves landing as soon as practicable. If the canopy shatters, drag 
increases and the pilot should plan a steeper-than-normal descent path during the approach.


8-18

Frosted Glider Canopy

34389
During flight at high altitude or in low ambient temperatures, frost formation or frozen condensation on the inside surface 
of the canopy can obstruct vision. The pilot should open the air vents and the side window to ventilate the cabin and to 
evacuate moist air before this occurs. Descending to lower altitudes for warmer air or flying in direct sunlight may help 
defrost the canopy.

Water Ballast Malfunctions

34390
One example of ballast failure involves asymmetrical wing tank draining. With one wing heavier than the other, the glider 
may become difficult to control at low airspeeds and during the landing rollout. Another failure involves wing tanks that 
drain using a central pipe that passes through the fuselage. A leak in this system may trap water in the fuselage. The pilot 
should determine if a means exists to evacuate the water from the fuselage. If the water collects far enough forward or aft, 
it may cause an out of CG condition and degrade pitch control. Pilots can regain elevator effectiveness by flying at mid-
to-high airspeeds. If pitch control degrades significantly, the pilot with sufficient altitude and a parachute might consider 
a bailout as the safest choice.

Retractable Landing Gear Malfunctions

34391
During flight, the pilot cannot generally resolve landing gear failures related to mechanical malfunctions. The pilot should 
fly the approach at normal airspeed and may need to use more spoiler or dive brake than normal during the approach due to 
the reduced drag. The pilot should land on the smoothest surface available, preferably an area that has good turf to reduce 
damage to the glider. A full stall, hard, or tailwheel first landing increases the chances of injury and damage, and the pilot 
should make a soft touchdown slightly above stall speed.

34392
In a gear-up landing, the glider makes considerable noise as it slides along the runway, and the wingtips travel closer to the 
ground. The pilot should keep the wings level while possible and keep the glider path as straight as possible while using 
the rudder to avoid collisions with objects on the ground or along the runway border. The pilot should focus on personal 
safety since no method exists to prevent glider skin damage during a gear-up landing.

Primary Flight Control Systems

34393
Failure of any primary flight control system presents a serious threat to safety. Incomplete preflight assembly represents the 
most frequent cause of control system failure. The crew should use a written checklist to verify each assembly operation 
and avoid interruptions during assembly. If interruptions occur, the crew should rerun the checklist from the beginning. 
A critical assembly check aids in confirming the glider has been assembled correctly and a positive control check prior to 
flight verifies control system continuity.

Elevator Malfunctions

34394
The most serious control system malfunction involves a failure of the elevator. Causes of elevator failure include the 
following:

34395

• An improper connection of the elevator actuators during assembly.

34396

• An elevator control lock that was not removed before flight.

34397

• Separation of the elevator gap seal tape.

34398

• Interference with free and full travel of the control stick or system caused by a foreign object such as a water bottle, 

camera, or unsecured rear-seat cushion.

34399

• A control stick secured by a lap belt or shoulder harness in the back seat.

34400

• A structural failure of the glider due to overstressing or flutter.


8-19

34402
If the pilot detects elevator irregularity or failure early in the takeoff roll, release of the tow line (or power reduction to 
idle in a self-launching glider), may allow obstacle avoidance. The pilot should use the brakes firmly to stop the glider as 
soon as possible.

51160
In an aerotow launch, the glider pilot should consider the effect the glider has on the safety of the tow pilot and if the glider 
pilot has a parachute. If the elevator control irregularity becomes apparent after takeoff and if close to the ground with 
a flat or slightly nose-low pitch attitude, the pilot should release the tow line. If sufficient elevator control exists during 
climb, staying attached and achieving a high altitude gives the pilot time to abandon the glider and deploy a parachute, if 
available.

34403
If continuing the climb, the pilot can experiment with the effect of other flight controls on the pitch attitude of the glider. 
These include the effects of various wing flap settings, spoilers or dive brakes, elevator trim system, and raising or lowering 
the landing gear. If flying a self-launching glider, the pilot can also experiment with the effect of power settings on pitch 
attitude.

34404
If aileron control functions, the pilot can bank the glider and use the rudder to moderate the attitude of the nose relative to 
the horizon. When approaching the desired pitch attitude, adjusting the bank angle can maintain the desired pitch attitude. 
Forward slips may have a predictable effect on pitch attitude and can be used to moderate it. Usually, a combination of 
these techniques allows some control of pitch attitude. Although difficult to use, these techniques allow some control. 
Achieving an altitude sufficient to permit bailing out usually ends in survival as parachutes rarely fail.

34405
Elevator gap seal tape, if in poor condition, can degrade elevator responsiveness. If the adhesive that bonds the gap seal 
leading edge to the horizontal stabilizer begins to fail, the airflow may lift the leading edge of the gap seal. This provides, 
in effect, a small spoiler that disturbs the airflow over the elevator just aft of the lifted seal. In extreme cases, this effect 
can remove all elevator authority.

Aileron Malfunctions

34407
Aileron failures can cause serious control problems. Causes of aileron failure include:

34408

• Improper connection of the aileron control actuators during assembly.

34409

• Aileron control lock not removed before flight.

34410

• Separation of the aileron gap seal tape.

34411

• Interference of a foreign object with free and full travel of the control stick or aileron circuit.

34399

• A control stick secured by a lap belt or shoulder harness in the back seat.

34413

• Structural failure and/or aileron flutter.

34414
The pilot might counteract this failure successfully because each wing has an aileron. If one aileron becomes disconnected 
or locked by an external control lock, the degree of motion still available in the other aileron may exert some influence 
on bank control. A glider with limited aileron movement may control more easily at high airspeeds than at low airspeeds.

34415
If both ailerons malfunction and compromise roll control, the pilot may use the secondary effect of the rudder to make 
gentle bank adjustments while maintaining a safe margin above stall speed. If the pilot applies left rudder in wings-level 
flight, the nose yaws to the left. If the pressure is held, the wings begin a gentle bank to the left. If the pilot applies and holds 
right rudder pressure, the glider yaws to the right, then begins to bank to the right. The pilot can use this secondary banking 
effect of the rudder for limited roll control. However, if the bank angle becomes excessive, recovery to wings-level flight 
using the rudder alone may become impossible. If the bank becomes too steep, the pilot should use any aileron influence 
available, as well as all available rudder to level the wings. If a parachute is available and the glider becomes uncontrollable 
at low airspeed, the best chance to escape serious injury may be to bail out from a safe altitude.


8-20

Rudder Malfunctions

34416
An actual rudder failure rarely occurs because removing and installing the vertical fin/rudder combination does not occur 
as part of the sequence of rigging and de-rigging the glider. The pilot should recognize any obvious directional control 
issue caused by a rudder malfunction at the very beginning of a launch and abort immediately.

34417
Rudder malfunctions may occur if the pilot forgets to remove the rudder control lock or when an unsecured object interferes 
with the free and full travel of the rudder pedals. Preflight preparation should include safe stowage of all items on board 
and removal of all flight control locks. The pretakeoff checklist encompasses all primary flight controls for correct and full 
travel prior to launch.

34419
During flight, if an object interferes with or jams the rudder pedals, the pilot should attempt to remove it. If removal fails, 
the pilot can attempt to deform, crush, or dislodge the object by applying force on the rudder pedals. Varying the load 
factor may dislodge the object but could also result in moving the object and jamming the elevator or aileron controls. If 
the object cannot be retrieved and stowed, the pilot should consider a precautionary landing.

34418
In the air, the pilot may obtain some degree of directional control by using adverse yaw. During rollout from an aborted 
launch or during landing rollout without rudder control, the pilot can deliberately ground the wingtip toward the direction 
of desired yaw. Putting the wingtip on the ground for a fraction of a second causes a slight yaw in that direction; however, 
holding the wingtip firmly on the ground may cause a ground loop in the direction of the grounded wingtip.

34420
Commonly misplaced objects that can cause rudder control interference include:

34421

• Water bottles.

34422

• Cameras.

34423

• Electronic computers.

34424

• Containers of food and similar items.

34425

• Clothing.

34426

• Sunglasses.

Secondary Flight Controls Systems

34428
Secondary flight control systems include the elevator trim system, wing flaps, and spoilers or dive brakes. Malfunction of 
these systems may present a serious challenge.

Elevator Trim Malfunctions

34429
When compensating for a malfunctioning elevator trim system, the pilot should apply pressure on the control stick to 
maintain the desired pitch attitude, and then bring the flight to safe conclusion.

Spoiler/Dive Brake Malfunctions

34430
Spoiler or dive brake system failures arise from rigging errors or omissions, environmental factors, and mechanical 
failures. Without proper connection, one or both spoilers or one or both dive brakes could deploy without the possibility 
of retraction. Spoiler or dive brake deployment during the launch or the climb may cause a launch emergency and possible 
tow failure. Spoilers or dive brakes that deploy asymmetrically, result in yaw and roll tendencies.

34431
If an asymmetric spoiler or dive brake extension occurs and the pilot cannot retract the extended spoiler or dive brake, the 
pilot may attempt to deploy the other spoiler or dive brake to restore the symmetry, which protects against stalling or a spin. 
If this condition arises during launch or climb, the pilot should abort the launch, extend the other spoiler or dive brake to 
restore symmetry, and land.


8-21

34432
Environmental factors include low temperature or icing during long, high altitude flights. Lower temperatures cause 
contraction of all glider components. Uneven contraction may bind the spoilers or dive brakes and make them difficult or 
impossible to deploy. Any moisture trapped in the system may freeze and interfere with operation of the spoilers or dive 
brakes. On the other hand, a rise in temperature causes all glider components to expand, which could bind the spoilers or 
dive brakes in the closed position. This could occur with the glider parked on the ground in direct summer sunlight.

34433
Mechanical failures can cause asymmetrical spoiler or dive brake extension during flight. Causes may include a broken 
weld in the spoiler or dive brake actuator mechanism, a defective control connector, or other mechanical failure. The glider 
yaws and banks toward the wing with the extended spoiler or dive brake. Aileron and rudder counteract these tendencies. 
To eliminate any possibility of a stall or spin entry, the pilot should maintain a safe margin above stall airspeed. While 
deploying the other spoiler or dive brake relieves the asymmetry, it reduces gliding range. This may be a significant 
concern if over rough terrain. Nevertheless, a controlled landing in rough terrain has much less associated risk than an 
asymmetric stall or spin.

Miscellaneous Flight System Malfunctions

39243

Towhook Malfunctions

34435
Failure modes include failure to release and uncommanded release. The pilot should form an emergency plan prior to 
launch for either condition. A pilot who cannot release the tow line should alert the tow pilot and follow appropriate 
emergency procedures.

Oxygen System Malfunctions

34436
If a suspected or known failure of the oxygen system occurs, the pilot should descend immediately to an altitude that does 
not require supplemental oxygen. A pilot deprived of sufficient oxygen, even for a short interval, loses critical thinking 
capability and may develop a false sense of wellbeing. After descending, the pilot should avoid hyperventilation and 
breathe normally to restore oxygen to the bloodstream.

34490
For high altitude flights, such as a wave flight, the oxygen bailout bottle should be in good condition and within easy reach 
if a high-altitude escape becomes necessary. Pilots who make high altitude flights should train for an event requiring glider 
abandonment, use of oxygen, and proper use of a parachute.

Drogue Chute Malfunctions

34437
Some gliders have a drogue chute to add drag during the approach to landing and enhance a steep approach. The drogue 
chute stows in the aft tip (tail cone) of the fuselage or in a special compartment in the base of the rudder. If the chute 
deploys accidentally or inadvertently during the launch, the pilot normally jettisons it.

34438
During an approach, an improperly packed or damp drogue chute may fail to deploy. If this happens, the pilot may use the 
rudder to sideslip briefly or use the rudder to yaw the glider to attempt deployment. Either technique can increase the drag 
force on the component that pulls the parachute out of the compartment. If neither technique deploys the drogue chute, the 
drogue canopy may deploy spontaneously. If this occurs, the pilot has the option to jettison the chute.

34439
Another malfunction involves failure of the drogue chute to inflate. If this happens, the canopy “streams” like a twisting 
ribbon of nylon, providing only a fraction of the expected drag. Full inflation, although unlikely after streaming occurs, 
would increase drag substantially. Rather than face any sudden increase in drag and if in doubt as to the status of deployment, 
the pilot can jettison the chute. Regardless of the malfunction type, the pilot should review approach and landing options 
for the drogue chute conditions.


8-22

Self-Launching Gliders

34440
Self-launching gliders have multiple systems to support powered flight. The pilot should review the GFM/POH for the 
self-launching glider flown, develop an understanding of the glider systems, and work with a glider instructor as necessary 
to develop proficiency. Additional systems in a self-launching glider may include the following:

34441

• Fuel tanks, lines, and pumps.

34442

• Engine or propeller extension and retraction systems.

34443

• Electrical system including engine starter system.

34444

• Lubricating oil system.

34445

• Engine cooling system.

34446

• Engine throttle controls.

34447

• Propeller blade pitch controls.

34448

• Engine monitoring instruments and systems.

34450
An engine in a self-launching glider may fail. Failures range from a very slight power loss at full throttle to catastrophic 
and sudden failure during a full-power takeoff. Fuel contamination or fuel exhaustion cause a significant number of these 
failures.

34451
Full power operation of an internal combustion engine cannot continue without a supply of fuel, source of ignition, internal 
cooling, and lubrication. The pilot should monitor the engine temperature, oil pressure, fuel pressure, and revolutions per 
minute (rpm) carefully to ensure the desired engine performance. Warning signs of impending difficulty include excessively 
high engine temperatures, abnormal engine oil temperatures, low oil pressure, low rpm despite high throttle settings, low 
fuel pressure, or abnormal engine operation that includes surging, backfiring, or missing. Abnormal engine performance 
may indicate complete engine failure will occur within a short time. Even if total engine failure does not occur, an engine 
that cannot produce full power may create an inability to hold altitude or climb. The best course of action, if airborne, 
involves landing followed by appropriate maintenance and repair.

34452
Regardless of the type of engine failure, the pilot should maintain flying airspeed and control the glider. Pilots flying 
self-launching gliders with a pod-mounted external engine above the fuselage need to lower the nose more aggressively 
than pilots flying a glider with an engine mounted in the nose. In the former, the thrust of the engine during full power 
operations tends to provide a nose-down pitching moment. If power fails, a nose-up pitching moment occurs due to the 
substantial parasite drag of the engine pod high above the longitudinal axis of the glider. At low altitudes, the pilot may not 
have time to stow the engine and will land with the engine extended. The GFM/POH contains authoritative information 
regarding the correct sequence of pilot actions in the event of power failure.

34453
A power failure during launch or climb may provide limited time to maneuver. The pilot should concentrate on flying the 
glider, selecting a suitable landing area, and making a safe landing. Troubleshooting should only occur if safe to do so. 
Even if the pilot restores power, full power may not come back. Flight with partial power may result in an inability to clear 
obstacles, such as wires, poles, hangars, or nearby terrain.

Inability to Restart a Self-Launching/Sustainer Glider Engine While Airborne

34454
Nearly all self-launching gliders have a procedure designed to start the engine while airborne. This procedure allows the 
pilot to fly home safely during a flight where soaring flight conditions deteriorate. However, engines may not start in some 
situations. The reasons include lack of fuel, ignition malfunction, low engine temperature due to cold soak, insufficient 
battery output, fuel vapor lock, lack of propeller response to blade pitch controls, and other factors. This becomes a serious 
problem with unsuitable terrain below for a safe off-field landing.


8-23

34456
The pilot should attempt the engine restart at an altitude high enough to complete a safe power-off approach and landing 
in case the restart fails. Self-launching glider pilots should not allow themselves to get into a situation at altitude where the 
only acceptable resolution involves relying on the engine.

Self-Launching Glider Propeller Malfunctions

34459
Propeller failures include propeller damage or disintegration, propeller drive belt or drive gear failure, or failure of the 
variable blade pitch control system. To perform an air-driven engine restart many self-launching gliders require placing 
propeller blades in a particular blade pitch position. In the absence of this adjustment, the propeller blades cannot deliver 
enough torque to start the engine.

Self-Launching Glider Electrical System Malfunctions

34460
An electrical system failure in a self-launching glider may render electrically controlled propeller pitch inoperative or 
prevent deployment of a pod engine for an air restart. Certain electrical failures prevent activation of an electric starter 
if used for an air restart. However, if able to maintain a suitable landing spot and with sufficient rising air, the pilot can 
continue to fly the glider without electrical power. If the pilot cannot reach an airport or suitable landing field, an off-airport 
landing will occur.

34461
Pilots fly some self-launching gliders at night using engine power for cruising. The glider must have the appropriate 
aeronautical lighting required for night operations (14 CFR part 91, section 91.209). If carrying passengers, the pilot must 
meet the recent flight experience to for night takeoffs and landings in accordance with 14 CFR part 61, section 61.57(b).

34462
Flight at night increases accident risk. If an electrical system failure during night operations extinguishes the position 
lights, pilots of nearby aircraft cannot see the self-launching glider and the glider pilot must assume responsibility for 
collision avoidance. The glider pilot may also have difficulty seeing the flight instruments or electrical circuit breakers. It 
makes good sense to have a working flashlight for such an emergency.

34463
The pilot should not reset any circuit breakers if smoke or the smell of smoke is present as recommended in CE- 10-11R1, 
Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin, dated January 14, 2010, available for download on the FAA’s DRS website.

3446434465
Resetting a circuit breaker in flight may increase the risk of an electrical overload and fire. [Figure 8-13] If electrical smoke 
fills the cabin, the pilot should consider ventilating the cabin and head directly for the nearest suitable airport and land. The 
aviation transceiver installed in the instrument panel may not function, but the pilot may use a portable battery-operated 
aviation two-way radio if available. The pilot can also receive landing instruction through air traffic control (ATC) light-
signals. The pilot should review 14 CFR part 91, section 125, and the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) section 
4-2-13, Traffic Control Light Signals.


8-24

34466

Figure 8-13. Self-launching glider circuit breakers.

Inflight Fire

34467
If a fire ignites, the pilot should do everything possible to reduce the spread of the fire and land as soon as possible. The 
self-launching glider GFM/POH is the authoritative source for emergency response to suspected in-flight fire. In general, 
the response includes the following steps:

34468

• Reduce throttle to idle.

34469

• Shut off fuel valves.

34470

• Shut off engine ignition.

58811

• Turn off the electrical system or any device contributing to the fire.

58812

• Consider a slip to keep flames away from the fuselage, if applicable.

34471

• Land immediately and stop as quickly as possible.

34472

• Evacuate the self-launching glider.

34473
After landing, the pilot and any passenger should exit the glider, move upwind and away from the glider, and keep 
onlookers away. The principal danger after evacuating the glider comes from fuel ignition and explosion, with the potential 
for serious injury.

34474
Modern gliders contain composite materials and resins that can produce poisonous fumes when overheated or burned. The 
glider pilot should avoid breathing the fumes and may consider jettisoning the canopy while in flight. This same modern 


8-25

construction also means a fire can spread very quickly. A quick landing or bailing out may save the pilot's life. If the fire 
spreads to critical structures, the airframe may fail before the landing.

Emergency Equipment & Survival Gear

34475
Emergency equipment and survival gear enhance safety for all cross-country flights.

Survival Gear Checklists

34476
Checklists help the pilot assemble survival equipment in an orderly manner. The essentials for survival include reliable 
and usable supplies of food and water. Equipment including blankets and clothing helps maintain a safe body temperature, 
which could become difficult to manage in extreme cold or extreme heat.

Food & Water

34477
During cross-country flight, pilots should carry an adequate supply of water and food (especially high-energy foods such 
as energy bars, granolas, and dried fruits). If necessary for survival, pilots may drink water from ballast tanks if accessible 
and free of contaminants, such as antifreeze.

Clothing

34478
Pilots should wear clothing appropriate to the local environment, including hat or cap, shirts, sweaters, pants, socks, 
walking shoes, space blanket, and gloves or mittens. Layered clothing provides flexibility to meet the demands of the 
environment since removal or addition of layers helps to regulate body temperature. A parachute canopy can be used as an 
effective layered garment to conserve body heat or to provide relief from excessive sunlight, and sunglasses can protect 
eyes from that light. Desert areas may be very hot in the day and very cold at night. Prolonged exposure to either condition 
can debilitate a stranded pilot.

Communication

34480
Pilots can use radios, telephones, or cell phones to summon assistance. An aviation transceiver can be tuned to broadcast 
and receive on the emergency frequency 121.5 MHz, the frequency used by a tow plane, the glider-to-glider frequency, or 
any other usable frequency that elicits a response. Newer ELTs provide a continuous signal on the 406 MHz Search and 
Rescue (SAR) system and activate either automatically or manually to transmit a unique digital identification code to the 
first satellite that comes into range. The satellite receives the signal and relays it to a ground station. If there is no ground 
station in view, the satellite sends it to the first available ground station. The ground station processor measures the Doppler 
shift of the ELT signal and calculates its position. This calculation is usually accurate to within 1.5 nautical miles on the 
first satellite pass and becomes more accurate with each pass. If the beacon has an integrated GPS or access to one on board 
the aircraft, the ELT transmits GPS position with the digital data.

34481
After the ground station has completed processing, it transmits the identification and position to the United States Mission 
Control Center (USMCC). The USMCC attaches the information contained in the 406 MHz beacon registration database 
for that ELT and generates an alert message. If the location lies within the continental U.S., the alert is sent to the Air Force 
Rescue Coordination Center (AFRCC) at Langley Air Force Base, Virginia. The AFRCC then takes the registration data 
and attempts to ascertain the aircraft’s disposition. By calling the emergency contact numbers, or by calling flight service 
stations with the N-number, they can quickly determine whether the aircraft is safe on the ground and not in need of SAR.

34482
Since most activations result from false alarms, resolution over the phone saves SAR assets for actual emergencies. If the 
AFRCC is unable to verify the aircraft is safe on the ground, it launches an SAR mission. This normally involves assigning 
the search to the USAF Auxiliary Civil Air Patrol and may include requesting assistance from the local SAR responders 
or law enforcement personnel.


8-26

34483
The unique digital code of each 406 MHz beacon associates each beacon with a particular aircraft. The beacon registration 
contains information such as tail number, home airport, type and color of aircraft, and several emergency points of contact. 
This provides rapid access to flight plans and other vital information and speeds the search effort.

34479
Pilots can supplement the use of electronic devices with signal mirrors, smoke, or prominent parachute canopy displays, 
which provide a good visual signal during daylight. The pilot can use a parachute canopy and case to lay out a prominent 
marker for searching aircraft. Flashlights and light beacons work well at night. Fires and flames from combustible material 
appear visible by night and provide smoke that may be seen during daylight. Signal flares can work during day or night. A 
whistle provides a good method for making a loud sound, but all audible signals including shouting and other noisemaking 
activities have limited range.

Navigation Equipment

34485
Pilots use aviation charts during flight planning and to navigate during flight. Chart data can pinpoint the location when 
a pilot makes an off-airport landing. Sectional charts have a useful scale for most cross-country flights. GPS coordinates 
also help the ground crew equipped with a GPS receiver and appropriate charts and maps. Commercially available detailed 
GPS maps make navigation easier for the ground crew.

Medical Equipment

34486
Medical kits routinely include bandages, medical tape, disinfectants, a tourniquet, matches, a knife or scissors, bug and 
snake repellent, and other useful items. Pilots should check that the kit contains medical items suitable for the current 
operating environment and replace any used or expired component. Glider occupants should have access to the kit after 
any emergency landing.

Stowage

34487
Loose items may shift when encountering inflight turbulence, low-G maneuvers, or during a hard landing. Stowing 
equipment properly protects occupants and maintains integrity of all flight controls and glider system controls.

Parachute

34488
Any parachute should be clean, dry, and stored in a cool place when not in use. Contaminants could reduce or destroy 
the integrity of the parachute material. The pilot has responsibility to ensure that the parachute meets any required FAA 
inspection criteria.

Chapter Summary

52126
This chapter presents a variety of abnormal and emergency scenarios. If an emergency should occur during an aerotow, 
each pilot should act in a manner that allows the pilot of the other aircraft to achieve a safe outcome. Emergencies can 
also occur during a launch using a winch or vehicle. These emergencies can occur in a matter of seconds, which require 
split-second decision making. Various emergencies during a self-launch can happen, and the pilot should know how to 
handle the various emergency scenarios discussed in this chapter. Gliders often fly in steep banks and at slow speeds. Pilot 
error during these conditions can result in a spiral dive or a spin. Pilots should understand the difference between these two 
scenarios and know how to recover from each one. Various system and equipment malfunctions can lead to an off-airport 
landing. Pilots prepare for this eventuality by carrying emergency equipment and survival gear for the weather and terrain 
they could encounter.


